
--- Page 1 ---
Indian Post Office Rules, 1933
Issued by the Government of India in the Department of Industries and Labour
under Notification No. 290 IMR/32, dated, New Delhi, the 30th March 1933 (as
subsequently amended from time to time.
No. 290 IMR/32. --- In exercise of the powers conferred by the Indian Post Office
Act, 1898). And in supersession of the Indian Post Office rules, 1926 the Central
Government is pleased to make the following rules, to have immediate effect:
PRELIMINARY
Short title.--These rules may be called the Indian Post Office Rules, 1933.
Definitions.—In these Rules ‘Act’ means the Indian Post Office Act, 1898.
Part I. – RATES OF POSTAGE
I—INLAND POSTAL ARTICLES
1. The following rates of postage shall be chargeable on postal articles where the postage
is prepaid:-
Letters
For a weight no exceeding twenty grams Rs. 5/-
For every twenty grams or fraction thereof Rs. 5/-
Letters Cards
For a letter card Rs. 2.50/-
Postcards not being postcards containing printed communication
For a single postcard 50 paise
For a reply postcard Rs … 1/-

--- Page 2 ---
Postcards containing printed communication
For a postcard … Rs. 6.00
Competition Post Cards
For a competition post card … Rs. 10/-
Meghdoot Post card
For a meghdoot post card……… 25 paise
Vide GSR 612 (E) dated 2nd September, 2002
Book, pattern and sample packets
For the first fifty grams or fraction thereof ... Rs. 4/-
For every additional fifty grams or
Fraction thereof in excess of fifty grams … Re. 3/-
Book packets containing printed books
(i)For the first one hundred grams or fraction … Re 1/-
thereof
(ii)For every one hundred grams or fraction … Re 1/-
thereof, in excess of one hundred grams
Book packets containing periodicals
(i) For the value of periodical from Rs. 2/- for first 100 gms and part
Re. 1/- to Rs. 20/- thereof, and Rs. 3/- for every
additional 100 grams and part thereof
(ii) For the value of periodical from Rs. Rs.4/- for first 100gms and part
21/- to Rs. 50/- thereof , and Rs. 5/- for every
additional 100 gms and part thereof
(iii) For the value of periodical from Rs. Rs. 8/-
51/- and above for first 100 gms and part thereof,
and Rs. 9/- for every additional 100
gms and part thereof
Vide GSR 381 (E) dated 24th May, 2002

--- Page 3 ---
Blind Literature Packets
“Blind Literature” packets shall be exempt from postage.
Registered Newspapers
(a) In the case of a single copy of a registered newspaper
For a weight not exceeding fifty grams … 25 paise
For a weight exceeding fifty grams but … 50 paise
not exceeding one hundred grams
For every additional one hundred grams or … 20 paise
fraction thereof exceeding one hundred grams
(b)In the case of more than one copy of the same issue of a registered newspaper being
carried in the same packet:-
For a weight not exceeding 100 grams … 50 paise
For every additional one hundred grams or … 20paise
fraction thereof, exceeding one hundred gms.
Provided that such a packet shall not be delivered at any addressee‘s residence
but shall be given to a recognized agent at the post office.
Parcels
For a weight not exceeding five hundred grams … Rs. 19.00
For every five hundred grams or fraction thereof
Exceeding 500 gms. … Rs. 16.00
1-A (a) Wherever the postage, tariff or charges are fixed for a postal article based on
weight, the weight shall mean the gross weight or the volumetric weight, whichever is
more.
(a) The manner of working out the volumetric weight and conditions of its applicability
shall be laid down, by order, by the Director General.”
Vide GSR 86 (E) dated 9th February 2009

--- Page 4 ---
2. (1) For letters, letter cards and post cards whether registered or unregistered
posted for transmission by air at any post office in India, no additional air mail
fee is Chargeable.
(2) On postal articles other than letters, letter cards, and post cards posted for
transmission by air at any post office in India, an air mail fee of rupee 2/- for the
first fifty grams or fraction thereof and Rs. 1/- for every additional fifty grams
or fraction thereof, shall be chargeable in addition to the postage and other
charges payable under the rules.
3. The following rates shall be chargeable on the delivery of postal articles where
the postage or air mail fee is not prepaid or is insufficiently prepaid :-
On an unpaid letter, postcard or packet … Double the prepaid rate
subject to a minimum of
one rupee.
On an insufficiently paid letter, letter … Double the deficiency
Card, postcard or packet subject to a minimum of
one Re.
On an unpaid or insufficiently paid … Double the prepaid rate
reply postcard or double the deficiency
as the case may be on
the original half only
subject to a minimum of
one rupee.
4. Business Reply Envelopes, Business Reply Letter Cards and Business Reply
Cards shall be transmitted without prepayment of postage and shall be charged
on delivery with a handling charge of rupee one per article of such Business
Reply Envelopes, Business Reply Letter Cards and Business Reply Cards in
addition to the postage specified for such article in rule 1.
Vide GSE 23 (E) dated 11th January 2002

--- Page 5 ---
II. FOREIGN POSTAL ARTICLES
5(1) The following rates of postage shall be chargeable on the postal articles to be
sent by surface where the postage is pre paid, namely:-
Sl.No Name of the service Item Name of the Rate (In
country Rupees)
1 LETTERS Up to 20 grams For all the 20.00
countries.
For every
additional 20 8.00
grams or part
thereof up to 500
grams
Beyond 500 grams, 30.00
for every
additional 100
grams or part
hereof up to 2000
grams
2. Small Packets UP to 100 grams For all the 40.00
countries
For every 30.00
additional 100
grams or part
thereof up to 2000
grams
3. Printed Papers Up to 20 grams For all the 10.00
countries
For every 5.00
additional 20
grams or part
thereof up to 500
grams 20.00
Beyond 500 grams,
for every
additional 100
grams or part

--- Page 6 ---
hereof up to 2000
grams
4. Blind literature For all the Exempted
packets countries from
postage
5. Post card (Single) Pakistan, 4.00
Bangladesh, Nepal
and Bhutan
(ii) Asian Pacific
Postal Union 6.00
countries except
Pakistan,
Bangladesh Nepal
and Bhutan.
(iii) Universal
Postal Union
countries other
than those referred 7.00
to in (i) and (ii)
above.
5(2) For the postal articles to be sent by Sur face Airlifted (SAL) mail the surcharge of
rupees 4 for 20 grams or part thereof for all countries other than SAARC countries
shall be charged in addition to normal surface mail rates.
Vide GSR 588 (E) dated 11th August 2008
5 -A(1) The following rate of postage shall be chargeable on the gross weight of bulk
bag of printed matter when the postage is prepaid, namely:-
Sl. No Name of service Item Name of the Rate (In
country Rupees)
1. BULK BAG Not exceeding For all the 350.00
5 kg countries
Per kg
exceeding 5 kg 100.00
Vide GSR 588 (E) dated 11th August 2008

--- Page 7 ---
5-A(2) For the postal articles to be sent by Surface Airlifted (SAL) mail the surcharge of
rupees 4 for 20 grams or part thereof for all countries other than SAARC countries shall
be charged in additional to normal surface mail rates.
Vide GSR 588 (E) dated 11th August 2008
6. The rates of postage and air mail fees specified in the Schedule below shall be
chargeable on postal articles posted at an Indian Office for transmission by air, or by air-
cum-surface routes, to the countries and places mentioned in the schedule and to which
such mode of transmission is available.
NOTE: - At least 75 percent of air mail fees shall be prepaid, otherwise this will be sent
by surface route. The registration fee in the case of registered articles shall be in addition
to the charges mentioned in the Schedule.
NOTE (2):- For airmail articles addressed to Asian Pacific Postal Union member
countries except Pakistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan and Nepal, international surface postage
rates, applicable to Universal Postal Union member countries (and not surface postage
rates of Asian Pacific Postal Union member countries) together with airmail surcharge
namely Rs. 3.00 for every 20 grams or part thereof is to be levied. Rates for airmail
postcards and aerogram will be the same for Asian Pacific Postal Union member
countries (except Pakistan, Nepal, Bhutan and Bangladesh) as for others”.
For airmail articles addressed to Pakistan, the rates given in the following schedule
shall apply:-
SCHEDULE
SERVICE SAARC Pakistan, Bangladesh, Asian Pacific Postal Universal
countries Nepal and Bhutan Union member Postal Union
Afghanistan, countries except Member
Sri Lanka Pakistan, countries
and Bangladesh, Nepal
Maldives and Bhutan
Airmail 12.00 8.00 12.00 12.00
Postcard
Aerogram 15.00 15.00 15.00 15.00
me
Air surcharge 3.00 3.00 5.00 5.00
for every 20
grams or part
thereof
Vide GSR 588 (E) dated 11thAugust, 2008

--- Page 8 ---
6-A. A delivery fee of rupees five shall be chargeable from the addressee on the
delivery of a small packet weighing more than 500 grams received by Foreign Post.
Vide GSR 860 (E) dated 12th December 1994
7. (1) The following rates shall be chargeable on the delivery of postal articles, other
than parcels and insured boxes, received by the Foreign Post, when the postage or
air mail fee is not prepaid or is insufficiently prepaid:-
When the postage or air mail fee is not prepaid .… Double the prepaid rate
When the postage or air mail fee is insufficiently prepaid …… Double the deficiency
Provided that the postage or air mail fee actually charged shall in no case be less
than 8 paise.
(2) For clearance through the Customs, a fee, recoverable from the addressee, at the
rate of thirty rupees if released after levying customs duty for each foreign letter
packet or insured box and at the rate of thirty rupees for each foreign parcel or bulk
bag of printed matter which weights more than 500 grams, each imported by post
into India on which Import customs duty is payable shall be levied.
Vide GSR 860 (E) dated 12th December 1994
PART II – MAIN CONDITIONS OF TRAMSMISISON BY POST OF POSTAL
ARTICLES
I – INLAND POSTAL ARTICLES
LETTERS
8.(1) Letters may be transmitted by post with or without prepayment of
postage.
(2) Any unpaid letter which is posted open or insecurely closed shall be securely
closed by the post office before being forwarded to its destination.
(3) Letters for transmission by post shall conform to the maximum and minimum
dimensions specified below:-

--- Page 9 ---
(a) Maximum dimensions:-
In roll form –
Single dimension 80 cms.
Sum of length & twice diameter 100 cms.
In other than roll form –
Single dimension 60 cms.
Sum of length & breadth and depth combined 90 cms.
(b) Minimum dimensions:-
In roll form -
Single dimension 10 cms.
Sum of length & twice diameter 17cms.
In other than roll form –
140 mm x 90 mm with tolerance of +- 2mm.
(4) (a) Letter in other than roll form shall be in envelopes of the following sizes,
unless its dimension are more than 353 x 250 mm, namely :-
1. 140 x 90mm
2. 152 x 90mm
3. 220 x 110mm
4. 162 x 114mm
5. 176 x 125mm
6. 229 x 162mm
7. 324 x 229mm
8. 353 x 250mm
With tolerance of +-2 mm
(b) These dimensions are not binding on letter sent to or received from any other
country;
(c) All envelopes must have flap at the top on the back of the longer side and not at
the right or the left;

--- Page 10 ---
(d) Envelops should be made of paper of the following thickness:-
Minimum 0.08mm
Maximum 0.18mm
(e) Surface of the envelope should be level with uniform surface structure:
9. Deleted.
9. (1) No letter shall be transmitted by post if it exceeds 2 kilograms in weight.
(2) The Director General may prescribe that every letter having contents of a specified
nature and posted at or addressed to such places as the Director General may notify,
shall be accompanied by a declaration in such form as may be prescribed by the
Director General.
LETTER CARDS
10-A. Letter cards may be transmitted by post provided that postage is prepaid in full
and nothing is attached to or enclosed in them:
Provided that they conform to the following specifications:
(a) The weight of the letter card shall not exceed five grams:
(b) The dimensions of the letter card including its flaps when unfolded or folded shall
be respectively as follows:-
Unfolded
Maximum - 30 centimeters by 21 centimeters.
Minimum - 28.2 centimeters by 18.2 centimeters.
Flaps- - Letter Card will have three flaps, one each on the left and right side not
exceeding 1.5 centimeters by 10 centimeters and another on the top side not
exceeding 1.5 centimeters by 21 centimeters. Flaps are not required if the Inland
letter Card can be closed by any other effective process.
Folded
Maximum - 21 centimeters by 10 centimeters
Minimum - 15.2 centimeters by 9centimeters.

--- Page 11 ---
(c) There shall be printed on the outside at the top left hand corner on the address
side of every folded letter intended for inland transmission the words “ Inland
Letter Card” or
(d) Inland Letter Card shall be made of paper of minimum 70 GSM.
Explanation (i) :- Letter Card” means a sheet of paper of the kind ordinarily used for
letter writing suitably folded and gummed.
Explanation (ii):-Letter Cards of private manufacture suitably folded and closed on all
sides through gumming or any other effective process may be conveyed by post,
provided the dimensions and other conditions mentioned in this rule are compiled
with.
Vide GSR 400 (E) dated 26th May, 2008
10-B. (1) nothing shall be attached to or enclosed in a letter card.
(2) Should a letter card be posted infringing the conditions laid down in sub rule (1) of
this rule or rule 10 A, it shall be taxed as a letter and double the deficiency at letter
postage rate shall be recovered subject to a minimum of Re. 1/-.
10-C. Bill Mail Service—
(1) The mail shall be received for posting at identified location (s) provided by India
Post under bill mail service.
(2) The bill mail service shall be delivered within a circumscribed area like one city or
one district.
(3) The posting of the bill mail shall not be less than 5000 pieces at a time.
(4) The bill mail shall be received at the receiving office sorted pin code wise and
bundled delivery office wise.
(5) The following rates of postage shall be chargeable on the bill mail service:-
For a weight not exceeding 50 grams Rs. 3.00
For every 50 grams or fraction thereof exceeding 50 grams Rs. 2.00
Explanation:- For the purposes of this rule,

--- Page 12 ---
(a) “bill mail service” means the communication in the nature of financial statement,
bill, monthly account bill or other such item of similar nature posted by a service
provider to a customer at least once in 90 days, but does not include a communication
in the nature of letter mail or having the character of a personal communication or
exclusively commercial publicity items,
(b) “city” include twin cities or urban agglomerations.
Vide GSR 511 (E) dated 27th July, 2007
10-D. Rakhi Mail Service:-
The following rates of postage shall be chargeable on the rakhi mail service:-
For a weight not exceeding 50 grams Rs. 5.00
For every 50 grams or fraction thereof exceeding 50 grams Rs. 3.00
Explanation:- For the purpose of this rule, the ‘rakhi mail service’ means any
communication comprising closed envelop addressed to an individual containing at
least one rakhi.
Vide GSR 466 (E) dated 8th August, 2006
10-E National Bill Mail Service--
(e) National Bill Mail Service:-
1. (a) The mail shall be received for posting at identified location provided by Indian
Post.
(b)The posting of national bill mail shall not be less than 10,000 pieces at a time for all
destinations taken together.
(c) The national bill mail service shall be delivered beyond the circumscribed area
delineated for bill mail service.
(d) The national bill mail shall be received at the receiving office sorted pin code wise
and bundled delivery office wise.
(e) The following rates of postage shall be chargeable on the bill mail service:-
For a weight not exceeding 50 grams Rs. 5.00
For every 50 grams or faction thereof
exceeding 50 grams Rs. 2.00

--- Page 13 ---
2. Director General may, by order, modify the conditions motioned in clauses (a),
(b) and (d) of sub-rule (1) and explanation or add new conditions from time to time.
Explanation:- For the purpose of this rule, “ National Bill Mail Service “ means the
communication of the same nature as prescribed for bill mail service, but addressed to
be delivered beyond the circumscribed area delineated for bill mail service.
Vide GSR 775(E) dated 18th December, 2007
Post Cards
11. (1) Single and reply cards of private manufacture may be transmitted by post as post
cards:
Provided that –
(a) The postage shall be prepaid in full:
(b) Their dimensions shall be 14cm * 9cm and they shall have the legend,” Post card”
written in Hindi or English or printed on the address side.
(c) As regards substance, they shall be neither thinner nor more flexible than the inland
post cards issued by the post office.
(2) A postcards shall be deemed to contain a printed communication, if any matter
(except the name and address of, and other particulars relating to, the sender and the
place and date of dispatch) is recorded by any process intended to make more than one
copy or impression, like Bradma, addressograph, photocopying, printing, cyclostyling,
rubber stamping, not bring typewriting on any part of the post card except the right
hand half of the address side thereof and shall be charged as per the postage rate
specified for printed post card in rule 1.
(3) A post card shall be deemed to be a competition post card if it is so embossed or
marked and is used in response to competition organized on or through Television,
radio, Newspaper or any other media and shall be charged as per the postage rate
specified for competition Post cards in rule 1.
(4) –A . A post card shall be deemed to be a meghdoot post card if it is so marked and
provides in the space on the left hand portion of the address, side, a space for single
colour or multi colour printed advertisement and it shall be charged as per the rate of
postage specified for meghdoot post card in rule 1 subject to the following conditions,
namely:-

--- Page 14 ---
(a) that such advertisement shall bear pictorial depictions or messages or both;
(b) that no advertisement shall be printed anywhere else except the space provided
therefor on such post card;
(c) that on the address portion of such post card the word “Meghdoot post card” shall
be printed in Hindi and English;
(d) that the obverse side of such post card shall be used for communication only;
(e) that such post card shall be single post card;
(f) that such post card shall conform to the dimensions and substance of post card
specified in clauses(b) and (c) of sub-rule (1) respectively.
Vide GSR 612 (E) dated 2nd September, 2002
12. All reply post cards of private manufacture shall display the title “post card” on the
address-side. Reply halves of reply-paid cards shall bear the words “post cards” and
Reply”. Whatever is printed on the address-side of the inland or international official
post cards issued by the Post Office is also permissible on the address-side of cards of
private manufacture.
13.(1) A post card shall not be folded, cut or otherwise altered except that the impressed
postage stamp (if any) may be perforated with initials’ nor may a post card be enclosed
in cover of any kind.
(2) The right-hand of the address-side of a postcard is in all cases reserved for the
address of the recipient, for the postage stamp or impression of stamping machine
necessary for prepayment, which should, so far as possible, be affixed in the upper
right-hand corner, and for the postal directions “Registered and “Acknowledgement
due” but the left hand half of the address-side, as well as the back, may be used by the
sender for the purpose of a written communication, or may be otherwise disposed of,
subject to the restriction mentioned in clause (3) of this rule.
NOTE I. A small space marked off by lines or minute dots to indicate the place where
the postage stamp should be affixed is allowed on the upper right- hand corner of the
address-side of postcards.
(3) Nothing shall be attached to a post card except:-

--- Page 15 ---
(a) stamps in payment of postage or other postal fees or stamp duty;
(b) a gummed label completely adherent to the card, and bearing the name and address
of the person to whom the card is sent;
(c) a similar label not exceeding 5 centimeters in length and 2 centimeters in width
bearing the name and address of the sender of the card; and
(d) engravings, illustration, drawings and photographs on very thin paper and
completely adherent to the card.
Stamps in payment of stamp duty may be affixed only to the back of the post card. The
articles specified in Clauses (c) and (d) may be affixed either to the back or the left hand
half of the address side.
(4) The reply-halves of reply-paid cards cannot be registered by the original senders of
such cards.
14. Should any of the conditions imposed by items (b) and (c) of Rule 11 and Rules 12
and 13 be infringed, the postcard shall be treated as a letter and charged on delivery
with double the deficiency between the postage already paid for such postcard and the
postage payable for a letter subject to a minimum of one rupee.
Greeting Post
14-A (1) The Greeting Post shall be the greeting card with envelope having embossed
stamp and bearing the same design in miniature as the greeting card.
(2) The Greeting cards shall be for festivals, for birthdays and for other general
important occasions.
Vide GSR 71(E) dated 7th February, 2001
15. Omitted.
Business Reply Envelopes and Cards
16 (1) “Business Reply Cards”, “Business Reply Envelopes” and “Business Reply Letter
Cards “ shall, subject to the provisions of this rule, be transmitted by post without
prepayment of postage, and postage thereon shall be collected in cash from the
addressee on deliver.

--- Page 16 ---
(2) Persons desiring the privilege of sending out Business Reply Cards, Letter Cards and
Envelopes for return to them shall make application to the Postmaster at the office to
which the cards or envelopes are to be returned, who shall transmit the application to
the Superintendent of Post Offices and await the receipt of a permit.
(3) The fee for the permit shall be recovered in advance from the applicant and shall be
charged at the following rates, namely:-
During the 1st quarter During the 2nd quarter During the 3rd quarter During the 4th
quarter
1st April to 30th June 1st July to 30th 1st October to 31st 1st January to 31st
September December Rs. 150 March
1 2 3 4
Rs. 200 Rs.150 Rs. 100 Rs. 50
The permit shall remain in force up to the 31st March of the financial year during which
it is issued but may be renewed during the month of March every year for a period of
one year beginning on the 1st of April of that year on payment of a fee of Rs. 200 in
respect of each renewal. The permit shall be cancelled if there is default in the payment
of the postage due on such cards and envelopes;
(4) The minimum size of “Business Reply Envelopes” shall conform to the minimum,
size prescribed for covers of letters. Business Reply Letter Cards shall conform in size,
quality and other conditions to those prescribed for letter cards of private manufacture.
The “Business Reply Cards” shall conform in size and quality with conditions
prescribed for postcards of private manufacture. The address side of each such card
shall be reserved fully for the particulars given in sub-rule (5) and the other side may be
used by the sender for the purpose of written communication, or may be otherwise
disposed of, provided that nothing shall be attached to any side of such card except :-
(a) in the case of address side, a Business Reply referred to in sub-rule (5); and
(b) in the case of the other side –
(i)a gummed label not exceeding 2 inches (5cms) in length and ¾ (2cms) in width,
completely adherent to the card and bearing the name and address of the sender of the
card; and
(ii) engravings, illustrations, drawings and photographs on very thin paper and
completely adherent to the card.

--- Page 17 ---
(5) Business Reply Cards, Letter Cards and Envelopes shall bear on the address side,
either printed thereon or on a label affixed thereto (a) the printed name and address of
the permit holder to whom the card or envelope is to be delivered, (b) the permit
number, (c) the name of the post office issuing the permit, (d) two thick vertical lines in
black or any other color near the right hand edge, (e) the words Business Reply Card”,
Business Reply Envelope”, or “Business Reply Label” as the case may be, (f) the words
“No postage stamp necessary, if posted in India”, and (g) the words “postage will be
paid by addressee”.
Sufficient space should be left for post-marking at the top of the card or envelop. A
permit holder may incorporate in any advertisement issued by him in a newspaper or
other publication a special design containing the printed entries hereinbefore specified
with a view to its being used as Business Reply Label and affixed to a card or envelope.
(5-A) A “Business Reply Cards shall not be folded, cut or otherwise altered.
(6) Business Reply Cards may be sent out as reply portions of double post cards or may
be enclosed with other matter, but Business Reply Envelopes and Business reply
Letter cards shall be enclosed with other matter.
(7) When Business Reply Cards, Letter Cards or Envelopes are returned to the office of
origin, they shall be delivered to the person for whom they are intended on payment
of the postage chargeable thereon plus handling charge as specified in rule 4.
16-A should any of the conditions imposed by rule 16 be infringed, the Business
Reply Card, Letter Card or Envelope shall be treated as an unpaid letter and
charged on delivery with double the deficiency between the postage already paid
for such card or envelope and the postage payable for a letter subject to a minimum
of one rupee.
Book Packets
17.A book packet may contain:-
(1) Newspapers, publications of all kinds, printed music books, paper, parchment and
cardboard, either blank or printed, not bearing any writing except as follows:-
(a) in the case of books and complimentary (such as, Christmas, New Year, Birthday,
ID and Bijova cards), the name of the person to whom sent or presented, the name and

--- Page 18 ---
address of the sender or owner, date, and not more than five words or initials of a
complimentary nature or signifying presentation:
(b) in the case of invoices, bills of lading and receipts (for goods or money) on printed
forms, the necessary manuscripts entries.
(c) in the case of invoices, bills of lading and receipts (for printed notices and printed
letters) and printed invitations, the date and hour of the occasions to which they related,
the name and address of the addressee, the name of the sender and, in the case of
notices of a meeting, the object of the meeting;
(d) in the case of printed market reports, quotations for goods and price lists, necessary
entries relating to particular of prices,
(e) in the case of printed notices for payment of premia posted by Insurance companies,
dates name and address of the insurant, “name of the insurance agent, name of the
branch office of the company at which the premium is payable, the sum assured under
the policy”, number of policy, amount and reference, number and letters; and,
(f)Proof corrections in proof sheets and music sheets, and corrections of printing errors
in other printed maters;
(g) omitted
(2) pictures, plans, maps and drawings whether done by hand or any mechanical
process, photographs and engraving, not bearing any writing except a signature, a date
and description not exceeding five words;
(3) business, commercial or legal documents drawn wholly or partly by hand, e.g.,
deeds, account, powers or attorney, proposals for insurance policies;
(4) Manuscripts for press and manuscript music, not bearing any written endorsement
other than a direction consisting of not more than ten words regarding the disposal or
return of the manuscript, and the name and address of the sender;
(5) licenses, statistical returns sent by or to officials by their designation only, and
Revenue and Judicial processes sent by Courts to Presidents of Union Boards, President
of Punchayats and Presidents of Chaukidari Unions and vice versa;
NOTE: - Court summons, notices and similar documents issued by a Criminal or Civil
Court, whether sent from the court of issue or returned to its direct, or through the

--- Page 19 ---
medium of another court, Government office, or railway administration as well as
Police diaries cannot be sent at book packet rates .
(6) Written letters of old date which have previously passed through the post and
served their original purpose;
(7) Documents wholly or partly produced in imitation of printing as well as documents
reproduced from printed manuscript or typewritten originals by photocopying or any
similar process;
Provided that:-
(i) At least 20 identical copies of such documents are presented for posting at the post
office counter;
(ii) If such documents are posted in letter boxes, they will be treated as letters;
(8) Pupils exercises, in original or with corrections, but without any note which does
not relate directly to the execution of the work.
(9) Horoscopes in manuscript not bearing any written endorsement.
(10) Petitions under the Rules and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha or under the Rules
of Procedures and conduct of Business in the Council of States for presentation or
report to the House of the People (Lok Sabha) or the Council States (Rajya Sabha), as
the case may be provided that the cover or wrapper thereof bears a declaration that
the petitions are submitted under such rules.
“Explanation- - - For the purpose of this rule,-
(i) “Printing “ means any species or printing easy to recognize or any mechanical
process ordinarily used to produce a number of identical copies but does not
include typewriting, carbon copies produced by any process, computer printing,
photocopying or any similar process;
(ii) “Writing” includes.-
Typewriting and any mechanical or other process ordinarily used to produce singly
document or a small number of documents;
(iii) “Imitation of printing” includes computer printing of all kinds, photocopying
and any similar process.
Vide GSR 7 E dated 3.01.2002

--- Page 20 ---
Conditions for charging special rates for book packets containing printed books
17-A. (1) The special rates mentioned in Rule 1 in respect of a book packet containing
printed books shall be applicable only if the following conditions are satisfied:-
(a) Such books packet shall not contain any publication, published at regular intervals;
(b) Such book packet shall bear on the outside the inscription “Printed books”;
(c) Each book in such book packet shall consist wholly or substantially of reading
matter, paintings, photographs, diagrams or any other similar matter, with or
without blank spaces, for notations by students;
(d) Each book in such book packet shall consist of printed matter but shall not contain
any advertisements other than incidental announcements or list of books;
(e) Each book in such book packet shall contain the name of the printer or publisher;
(f) No book in such book packet shall bear any character or inscription reproduced by
any means other than printing;
Provided that any such book may contain in writing the name of the person to whom
it is sent or presented, the date, the name and address of the sender or owner, and not
more than five words or initials of a complimentary nature or signifying presentation.
Explanation.- The expression printing means anything capable of being recognized as
printing or any mechanical process ordinarily used to produce a number of identical
copies including the book or books on compact disk or floppy with or without printed
book or books but does not include type writing, carbon copies processed by any
mechanical process, Computer printing, photocopying or any similar process.
Vide GSR 292 (E) dated 13th May, 2005
(g) No book in such book packet shall contain any price list or bills or orders for
supply of the books.
Provided that the book packet may contain an invoice or a bill or both pertaining
to books being sent in that packet.
(h) No book or books on compact disk or floppy with or without any printed book
or books in such book packets shall be accepted for transmission by post unless
they are presented in the Post Office designated by the Head of the Circe for this
purpose and such packets presented for posting are not less than one thousand at
a time.
Vide GSR 292 (E) dated 13th May, 2005

--- Page 21 ---
(2) The provisions of Rules 18 to 23 (both inclusive) shall, so far as may, apply in
relation to book packets to which this rule applies as they apply in relation to
book packets to which Rule 17 applies,
Conditions for charging special rates for book packets containing periodical
17-B. (1) The special rates of postage mentioned in Rule 1 in respect of a book
packet containing periodicals shall be applicable only if the following conditions
are satisfied:-
(a) That it is registered with the Registrar of Newspapers for India under the
Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867 (25 of 1867).
(b) That the periodical bears in print in any convenient place either on the
first or last page thereof, the superscription “Registration with the Registrar of
Newspapers for India under No……………”
(2) The provision of Rules 18 to 23 (both inclusive) shall , so far as may, apply in
relation to book packets containing periodicals as they apply in relation to book
packets to which Rule 17 applies.
18. With any of the articles mentioned in rule 17 may be sent anything that is
necessary for their safe transmission through the post, such as rollers, etc., and any
legitimate binding, mounting, or covering, loose or attached, and anything that
ordinarily appertains to such articles, as pens and pencils in the case of a pocket
book, photographs in the case of a photograph book, and card places in the case of
visiting cards.
Prohibitions
19. (a) No communication of the nature of a letter or having the character of a
personal communication shall be enclosed in or written upon a book packet except
to the extent specified in rule 17.
(b) No card bearing the heading “Post card” shall be transmitted open as a book
packet.

--- Page 22 ---
(c) A book packet shall not contain “paper money” which for the purposes of
this rule includes unobliterated postage or other stamps, currency notes, hundies,
cheques, bank notes, bank post bills, bills of exchange, and all orders or authorities
for the payment of money; provided that a book packet may contain one stamped
and addressed envelope, post card or wrapper bearing the name and address of
the sender of the packet, or some other person named thereon.
20. (1) The dimensions of a book packet shall be subject to the following
maximum and minimum limits:-
(i) Maximum.
In roll form – length 80 cms.
Sum of length & twice diameter 100 cms.
In other than roll form 60x30x30 cms
(ii) Minimum
In roll form – Single dimension 10 cms.
Sum of length & twice diameter 17cms.
In other than roll form except in envelope 140mm x 90mm with tolerance of
+- 2 mm
(2) Book packets when sent open in card form, whether folded or not shall be
neither thinner nor more flexible than inland postcard.
(3) Packet in envelope shall conform to the following sizes, unless its dimensions
are more than 353mm x 250 mm, namely:-
1. 140 x 90mm
2. 152 x 90mm
3. 220 x 110 mm
4. 162 x 114mm
5. 176 x 125 mm
6. 229 x 162 mm
7. 324 x 229 mm

--- Page 23 ---
8. 353 x 250 mm
With tolerance of +- 2 mm.
Vide GSR 616 dated 16/09/1993
21. (1) A book packet may not exceed 5 kilograms in weight, but the Director
General may, in special circumstances, prescribe a lower limit of weight for book
packets for and from any particular post office or offices.
(2) The Director General may also prescribe that every book packet having contents
of a specified nature and posted at or addressed to such places as the Director
General may notify shall be accompanied by a declaration in such form as may be
prescribed by the Director General.
22. A book packet shall be posted without a cover, or in an unfastened envelope, or
in a cover which can be easily removed for the purpose of examination without
breaking any seal or tearing any paper or separating any adhering surfaces. A
packet posted without a cover may not be fastened or otherwise treated so as to
prevent easy examination.
23. (1) If a book packet to which Sub-rule (2) does not apply is found to contain any
thing not permitted by the rules or to be packed in a manner not in accordance with
the rules, it shall be treated as a letter or a parcel and shall be charged on delivery
with double the deficiency between the postage already paid and the postage
payable for a letter or parcel. Whichever may be less provided that the conditions
subject to which such postage can be charged are fulfilled. Any postage paid on it
shall be taken into account in assessing the charges but the amount charged under
this sub-rule shall in no case be less than one rupee. If the postage paid is equal to
or more than charges calculated, no additional amount will be charged but no
refund will be made.
(2) If a book packet is found to be in excess of either the prescribed size or the
prescribed weight, it shall be returned to the sender. Any postage paid on it shall
not be refunded.
Pattern and Sample packets
24. (1) A pattern or sample packet may contain bona fide trade patterns or samples
of merchandise not having any saleable value, together with, or without, any
matter which may be sent as a book packet;

--- Page 24 ---
Provided that small amounts of prasad or similar materials greetings or blessings,
or messages of similar nature, may also be sent in pattern or sample packets if
they have no intrinsic monetary value, and the total weight of such packet does
not exceed 10 grams:
Provided further that there shall be no writing upon or in a pattern or sample
packet, except the name and address of the sender, the name and address of the
person for whom it is intended , a trade mark, numbers, prices and indications as to
the weight, size or quantity to be disposed of.
(2) Objects of natural history, dried or preserved animals and plants, geological
specimens and other similar objects shall also be admitted to transmission by post
at the rates of postage for pattern and sample packets provided that they are not
sent for a commercial purpose, and that they are packed in the manner prescribed
for pattern and sample packets generally.
25. (1) The dimensions of a pattern or sample packet shall conform to the following
maximum and minimum limits:-
(a) Maximum:-
In roll form – Length 80 centimeters
Sum of length& twice diameter 100 centimeters
In other than roll form 60 x 30 x 30 centimeters
(b)Minimum
In roll form – single dimension 10 centimeters
Sum of length & twice diameter 17 centimeters
In other than roll form 10 x 7 centimeters
(2) The weight of pattern or sample packet shall not exceed 2 kilograms:

--- Page 25 ---
Provided that the Director General may, in special circumstances, fix a lower
limit of weight for pattern and sample packets, for and from any particular post
office or offices.
26. (1) A pattern or sample packet shall be posted without a cover, or with a cover
at both ends, or in an unfastened envelope or other cover which can be easily
removed so as to admit of a ready examination of the contents.
(2) Samples of seeds, drugs and other articles which cannot be sent in unfastened or
removable envelopes may sent enclosed in boxes or bags, provided that they are
fastened in such a way that they can be easily opened, they may also be sent in air-
tight cases, when necessary, provided that the nature of the contents is certified on
the cover under the full signature and address of the sender.
(3) Articles of glass or other fragile material shall be securely packed (in boxes of
metal, wood, or strong corrugated cardboard) in such a way as to prevent all risk of
injury to the mails or to the officers of the Post Office.
(4) Liquids, oils and substances which easily liquefy shall e enclosed in receptacles
hermetically sealed. Each receptacle shall be placed in a special box of metal or of
strong wood or of strong corrugated cardboard containing saw-dust, cotton, or
spongy material in sufficient quantity to absorb the liquid in case the receptacle be
broken. The lid of the box shall be fastened down in such a manner that it will not
easily be detached.
(5) Fatty substances which are not easily liquefied such as ointments, soft soaps,
resin, etc, shall be enclosed in an inner cover (box, bag of linen or parchment, etc),
which shall itself be placed in a second box of wood, metal or strong and thick
leather.
(6) Dry powders, whether dyes or not, shall be placed in cardboard boxes, which
themselves shall be enclosed in a bag of linen or parchment.
(7) Live bees shall be enclosed in boxes so constructed as to prevent all danger and
to allow the contents to be ascertained.
27. (1) If a pattern or sample packet is found to contain any thing not permitted by
the rules, or to be in excess of the prescribed size or weight, or to be packed in a
manner not in accordance with the rules, it shall be treated as a letter or parcel and
charged on delivery with double the deficiency between the postage already paid

--- Page 26 ---
for the pattern or sample packet and the postage payable for a letter or parcel,
whichever is less, subject to a minimum of one rupee.
(2) If a packet containing samples of any of the articles mentioned in clauses (3) to
(7) of rule 26 is not packed in the manner prescribed therein, it shall not be
forwarded.
“Blind Literature” Packets
28. Papers of any kind, periodicals, and books impressed in “Braille” or other
special type for the use of the blind, shall be transmitted by post as “blind literature”
packets, provided that they are posted in accordance with the following conditions:-
(a) The packet shall consist only of articles specially impressed as described above
for the use of the blind, and shall not contain any communication either in writing or
printed in ordinary type, except the title and table of contents of the book or
periodicals, and any key to, or instructions, for the use of the special type, or any
enclosure except a label for the return of the packet.
(b) The packet shall bear on the outside the inscription “Literature for the Blind”,
and written or printed name and address of the sender.
(c) The packet shall be posted either without a cover, or in a cover open at both
ends, which can easily be removed for the purpose of examination.
(d) The dimensions of the packet shall conform to the following maximum and
minimum limits:-
(i) Maximum
In roll form - Length 80 centimeters
Sum of length & twice diameter 100 centimeters
In other than roll form 60 x 30 x 30 centimeters
(ii)Minimum
In roll form - Length 10 centimeters
Sum of length & twice diameter 17 centimeters

--- Page 27 ---
In other than roll form 10 x 7 centimeters
(e)The weight of a “blind literature” packet shall not exceed 7 kilograms:
Provided that the Director General may prescribe a lower limit in respect of “Blind
Literature” packets for and from a particular post office or offices.
Explanation:- Plates bearing the characters of writing sound records for the use of
the blind and discs, films, tapes and wires on which spoken messages for the blind
have been recorded when sent by, or addressed to, an officially recognized
institution for the blind shall be treated as “Blind Literature.
29. Should any of the conditions imposed by rule 28 be infringed, the blind literature
packet will be treated as a letter, book packet or a parcel according to whichever
entails lower charge (subject to the conditions prescribed for such class of articles
being satisfied) and on delivery will be charged with double the difference between
the postage paid and postage payable subject to a minimum of Re. 1/- . If however
the postage paid is more than the postage then no amount will be payable but no
refund will be made.
Registered Newspapers
30. (1) Newspapers as defined in section 9 of the Act shall be transmitted by post as
registered newspapers, provided that they comply with the following conditions:-
(a) The newspaper shall have been registered in the office of the Postmaster General
or officer exercising the powers of the Postmaster General of the postal circle in
which it is published, and the period for which its registration or the last renewal
thereof as the case may be remains in force shall not have expired.
(b) The full postage shall be prepaid unless the newspaper is exempted from
prepayment of postage by a valid license.
(c) The newspaper shall bear in print in any convenient place either on the first or
last page the word “Registered “ followed by the registration number which has
been assigned to it by the Postmaster General or other officer referred to in condition
(a).

--- Page 28 ---
(d) The newspaper shall be posted at the place of publication or as the case may be
at the place permitted under this sub-rule, by its proprietor manager or publisher
on such days of the week or on such dates of the month which may have been
specified by him in this behalf at the time of applying for registration or at any time
subsequent thereto;
Provided that a clear notice of three days shall be given to the Postmaster of the
place in case any change is desired in the dates or days of posting so specified;
Provided further that the requirement as to three day’s notice may be waived by the
Postmaster General if he is satisfied that the proprietor manager or publisher or
agent could not adhere to it for reasons beyond his control:
Provided also that the number of days or dates on which an issue can be posted
shall not be altered except with the prior authority of the Postmaster General.
In cases where the proprietor, manager or publisher cannot adhere to the provision
of three days notice due to reasons beyond his control, the Postmaster General, may
in relaxation of the said provision permit the posting of the newspaper at any time
subsequent to the prescribed date provided the application for late posting is
received by him before the prescribed date of posting. The interval between the
dates of publication of the issue sought to be posted late and the previous one shall
not in any case exceed 31 days.
Provided that in no case shall any issue be posted on more than one day or date with
the exception of a weekly, fortnightly or monthly newspaper, which may be posted
on two consecutive days falling within the same week from Monday to Sunday and
in case the second consecutive day is a Sunday or a gazetted holiday, on the
succeeding day; provided further that the facility of posting registered newspapers
on Sunday shall be available in such offices only as remain open on Sunday.
(e) Every copy or bundle of copies of the newspaper shall be posted without a
wrapper or with a wrapper open at both one which can be easily removed for an
inspection at the newspaper or in an unfastened envelope, provided that whatever
means are employed to secure copies of the newspapers while in course of
transmission by post, the registration marks referred to in clause (c) must be clearly
visible without removing the wrapper or envelope.

--- Page 29 ---
(f) There shall be no word printed in the newspaper after its publication or upon
the cover ( if any) thereof, nor shall any writing or mark be made upon it or upon
the cover ( if any) thereof, except the name and address of the person to whom it is
sent, and, in the case of packets containing more than one copy of the newspaper
the number of copies of the newspaper enclosed and if desired the subscribers
number and the name and address of the newspaper or of the sender and a
reference to any place in the newspaper to which the attention of the addresses is
directed by means stamp or seal impression containing the words “marked copy”
and, in the case of press packets addressed to railway book stalls or recognized
agents on the line the direction ‘To be delivered direct from the mail van’.
(g) There shall be no paper or thing enclosed in or with any such newspaper other
than an extra or supplement as specified in section 9 of the Act.
NOTE:- Any newspaper in which document of any of the following descriptions is
enclosed as a supplement shall be treated as a book packet:-
(i) an advertisement sheet printed for an advertiser and sent to the publisher of
newspaper for distribution with it,
(ii) an advertisement sheet with an order form attached, a prospectus with an
application form attached or a proposal or enquiry form.
(iii) any document drawn up in the form of a direct personal communication to
the recipient such as a printed circular in the form of a letter purporting to be
addressed to a person by whom the newspaper in which it is enclosed is received.
(h)The registration number or, as the case may be, registration numbers shall not be
printed on the wrapper.
(i) The date of the publication of the newspaper shall be printed on its first or last
page
Vide GSR 152 dated 23.03.1994
2. An application for the first registration of a newspaper for the purposes of clause
(a) of sub-rule (1)_ in a Postal Circle referred to therein shall, save in the case of a
newspaper printed or published under the orders of any government in India or for

--- Page 30 ---
official purposes be made in the form prescribed for the purpose by the Director
General, and be accompanied by two copies of the latest issue of the newspaper
sought to be registered a list showing the names and addresses of at least fifty bona
fide subscribers who have paid their subscriptions ,and;
(i) by a certificate from the District presidency or sub-Divisional Magistrate within
whose local jurisdiction the newspaper is printed or published or the printer or the
publisher resides that -
(a) the declaration or declarations required by section 5 of the Press and
Registration of book act, 1867 ( 25 of 1867), has or have been made, or,
(b) no such declaration is required under the said Act as the publication is not a
newspaper according to the definition given in that Act.
(ii) Omitted.
(3) A (a) first registration shall be remain in force till 31st December of the third
calendar year following that in which it was effected. Every subsequent renewal of
registration shall remain in force for three calendar years.
(b) Application for renewal of registration shall be made so as to reach the officer
concerned at least three months before the date of expiry of the previous
registration and shall be accompanied by two copies of the latest issue of the
publication of the newspaper.
(c ) A late fee of fifty rupees shall be charged for each application for renewal
received later than the last working day of the third calendar month preceding the
last month of the period of previous registration.
(d) Renewal under this sub rule, in all cases shall be granted only when the
Postmaster General or other officer referred to in sub rule (1) is satisfied that the
provisions of Sub section (2) of Section 9 of the Act are fulfilled and where the
previous registration expires before registration is renewed the publication shall be
prepaid at book packet pending issue of the renewal.
(e) Where the application for renewal under this Sub section, is received after the
date of expiry of the previous registration, a late fee of one hundred rupees shall be
charged with such application.
Vide GSR 637 dated 11 th September 2002

--- Page 31 ---
(4) Nothing in this rule shall be deemed to prevent newspapers from being
transmitted by post, either singly or –
otherwise, at the rates and under the conditions prescribed for book packets, or for
book packets containing periodicals and if a newspaper sought to be transmitted by
post as a registered newspaper fails to comply with any of the conditions specified
in sub rule (1), it shall be transmitted by post at the said rates and under the said
conditions.
(5) The Postmaster General or officer exercising the powers of the Postmaster
General of the Postal Circle in which the newspaper is published or, as the case
may be, posted or sought to be posted may cancel or refuse the registration of a
newspaper (1) when he is satisfied that the provisions of sub section (2) of section 9
of the Act do not continue to be fulfilled: or (ii) as soon as the certificate or the
recommendation mentioned in item (i) of sub rule (2) respectively is formally
cancelled or withdrawn by the authorities concerned.
30-A.Packets of registered newspapers containing more than one copy of the same
issue may be transmitted by post at the special rate of postage prescribed for such
packets provided the following conditions in addition to those prescribed in rule 30
are complied with :-
(a) Each packet shall contain only copies of the same registered newspaper and of
the same date.
(b) The packets shall be posted in the same post office and on the same day as in the
case of single copies of the same registered newspaper.
(c) The packets shall be addressed to the local agents any are place of destination
whose name and address shall be communicated to the office of posting by the
proprietor, manager or publisher of the registered newspaper.
(d) The packets shall not be delivered at the addressees, residence but shall be
handed over at the window of the office of destination to the local agent or any
person authorized in this behalf by the local agent.
The sender shall indicate the following on the packet: “To be delivered at window”
31.(1) A parcel may contain a single written communication the nature of a letter or
having the character of a per communication, addressed to the addressee of the .
(2) Save as provided in sub rule (1) no written communication shall be enclosed in a
parcel.

--- Page 32 ---
(3) If a parcel is suspected to contain any written communication other than the one
permitted by sub rule (1), shall be forwarded to its destination marked ‘for open
delivery’. If on being opened in the office of delivery in the presence of the
addressee or his authorized agent, it is found to contain any written communication
other than the one permitted under sub-rule (1), each such written communication
shall be charged on delivery with double the letter postage. Any postage paid on
the parcel shall not be taken into account in assessing this charge. If the addressee
fails to attend as required or refused to pay the charge in full, the parcel shall be
returned to the sender from whom the charge shall not be recovered.
32. Deleted.
33. (1) The weight of an unregistered parcel shall not exceed 4 kilograms; and the
weight of a registered parcel shall not exceed :-
(a) 10 kilograms if it is posted at or addressed to a branch post office and
(b) 20 kilograms in all other cases.
(2) The length of a parcel shall not exceed one metre and the length and girth
combined shall not exceed 1.80 metres .
(3) The minimum dimensions of a parcel shall be as follows:-
(a) In roll form-single dimension 10 centimetres
sum of length & twice diameter 17 centimetres
(b) In other than roll form 10 x 7 centimetres
(4) No parcel shall be such that, by reason of the shape, manner of packing or any other
feature, it cannot be carried by post without serious inconvenience or risk.
33-A. The Director General may authorize the Head of Postal Circle to specify,
from time to time, the designated office where the postal article called as “Express
Parcel Post” may be booked at subject to the following conditions, namely:-
(a) the minimum tariff rate for booking Express Parcel Post shall be for 3 kgs. And
the maximum weight for which Express Parcel Post may be booked, shall be 35
kgs.;
(b) The Express Parcel shall not exceed 1.50 metres of any one dimension and 3
metres for length and girth together;
(c) The tariff to be charged for Express Parcel Post shall be as mentioned below:-

--- Page 33 ---
Category Rate up to 2 kg For every For every additional
additional Kg kg. (beyond 10 kg.)
Local Rs. 25 Rs. 3 Rs.2
Upto 500 kms. Rs. 40 Rs. 5 Rs. 4
501-1000 kms. Rs. 50 Rs. 10 Rs. 8
1001-2000 kms. Rs. 60 Rs. 20 Rs. 15
Above 2000 kms. Rs. 80 Rs. 25 Rs. 20
Vide GSR 238 (E) dated 28.3.2008
(d) No compulsory registration and insurance shall be necessary for Express Parcel
Post irrespective of weight or value thereof,
(e) In addition to the rates mentioned in condition (c), a value-payable Express
parcel Post may be booked on payment of an additional fee calculated according
to the schedule given in sub-rule (2) of rule 96 and the maximum limit of value for
which such value payable Express parcel Post may be booked shall be Rs.
50,000/-,
(f) All Express Parcel Post shall be delivered in accordance with the terms and
conditions as may be specified by the Director General, in this behalf, and in case
of loss of the Express parcel Post or contents thereof, the compensation payable
shall be restricted to Rs. 500/- or the actual value of the parcel or the contents lost,
whichever is less.
Vide GSR 670 (E) dated 14th October, 2004
(g) The Express Parcel Post Service shall be available to customers who sign Business
Parcel agreement with Department of Post;
(h) Customers who have not signed the Business Parcel Agreement , shall book
Express Parcel Post under Express Parcel Post Retail Service;
(i)the tariff to be charged for Express Parcel Post Retail Service shall be as
mentioned .
Category Rate up to 2 kg For every additional Kg
1 2 3
Local Rs. 35 Rs. 5
Upto 500 kms. Rs. 50 Rs. 8
501-1000 kms. Rs. 60 Rs. 12
1001-2000 kms. Rs. 70 Rs. 25
Above 2000 kms. Rs. 90 Rs. 35
Vide GSR 282 (E) dated 23rd April, 2009
33-B The Director General may authorize the Heads of Postal Circles to designate
from time to time, the designated office where article called as “Overnight Parcel”
may be booked , subject to the following conditions namely:-

--- Page 34 ---
(a) The maximum weight of the Overnight Parcel shall be 10kgs;
(b) The tariff to be charged for the Overnight Parcel shall be as under, namely:-
Charge (in Rs.)
For the first 2 kgs. 250
For every additional Kg. or part 100
thereof
(c) Additional charge for door delivery shall be fifty rupees for each Overnight
Parcel;
(d) The size of an ‘Overnight Parcel’ shall not exceed 1.50 meters for anyone
dimension or 3 meters for the sum of the length and the greatest circumference
measured in a direction other than the length;
(e) The Director General may provide for insurance to the Overnight parcel service,
if consider necessary. “
Vide GSR 789 dated 28th October 2009
33. C The Department of Posts will provide ‘Flat Rate Parcel Service ‘ under the
brand ‘Parcel Post’ providing time bound delivery of parcels subject to the
following conditions, namely:-
(a) Flat Rate Parcel will be booked in Flat Rate Parcel Boxes provided by the
Department of Posts;
(b) Flat Rate Parcels will be booked in identified Post Offices only but will be
delivered through all Post Offices;
(c) Flat Rate Parcel Boxes will be available in three different weight categories of
1.0kg, 2.5k.g., and 5.0 kg.,
(d) The tariff to be charged for the Flat Rate Parcel (Domestic) shall be as under
namely:-
Size of Flat Rate Parcel Weight of Flat Rate Parcel Tariff in (Rs.)
Box (in kg.)
S Upto 1.0 kg. 125
M Upto 2.5 kg. 200
L Upto 5.0kg. 400
(e) No compulsory registration and coverage of insurance shall be necessary for Flat
Rate Parcel irrespective of weight or value thereof. Coin, bullion, platinum, precious
stones, jewellary , currency notes and articles of gold or silver may be sent by Flat Rate
Parcels only after coverage of insurance;

--- Page 35 ---
(a) All Flat Rate Parcels shall be delivered in accordance with the terms and
conditions as may be specified by the Director General, in this behalf, and in case
of loss of the flat Rate Parcel or contents thereof, the compensation payable shall be
restricted to Rs. 500 or the actual value of the Flat Rate Parcel or the contents lost
whichever is less.
Vide GSR 63 (E) dated 3.2.2011
34. The Director-General may, in special circumstances , prescribe a lower limit of
weight than that specified in sub-rule (1) of rule 33 in respect of all or any classes or
class of parcels for and from all or any post offices or post office.
35. (1) A parcel shall be packed and enclosed in a reasonably strong case, wrapper,
or cover, fastened in a manner calculated to preserve the contents from loss or
damage in the post, to prevent any tampering therewith and to protect other postal
articles from being damaged in any way thereby.
If a parcel contains cloth or woolen material, it must be packed in a strong wrapper
with an outer covering of stout cardboard or cloth. Parcels containing articles of
great value like gold, bullion, jewellery and the like must be packed in a metal
container or a wooden or a stout card-board case according to the nature of the
article.
(2) Liquids and substances which liquify easily shall be dispatched in a double
receptacle. Between the first receptacle (bottle flask not box etc.) and the second
(which shall be a box of metal or of strong wood) some space shall be soft to be
filled with saw dust, bran, or some other absorbing material in sufficient quantity to
absorb all the liquid contents in the event of breakage.
(3) Live bees shall be enclosed in suitable cases and so packed as to prevent all risks
of injury to other postal articles in course of transmission by post or to officers of
the Post Office.
(4) Any article presented at the window as a parcel shall have the inscription
“Registered Parcel” or “Unregistered Parcel” on the address side of the article.
36. Human and other viscera may be transmitted by post to chemical examiners for
analysis subject to the following conditions:-
(a) The suspected viscous or other material to be sent for examination shall be
enclosed in a glass bottle or jar, fitted with a stopper or sound cork.

--- Page 36 ---
(b) Great care shall be taken that the stopper or cork of the bottle fits tightly. This
precaution is especially necessary when alcohol is used as a preservative; in such
cases a ring of bee’s wax or candle-wax shall be placed round the lip of the bottle so
as to cover the shoulder of the stopper. The stopper shall be carefully fastened
down with bladder or leather and sealed.
(c) The glass bottle or jar shall then be placed in a strong wooden or tin box, which
shall be large enough to allow of a layer of cotton, at least 18 millimeters thick,
being placed between the bottle or jar and the box.
(d) The box itself shall be encased in cloth, which shall be securely closed and
sealed. The seals shall be at intervals not exceeding 7-1/2 centimeters along each
seam. All the seals shall be of the same kind of wax and shall bear distinct
impressions of the same device. The device shall not be that of a current coin or
merely a series of straight curved or crossed lines.
36-A. Brains of rabid animals may be transmitted by post to authorized
laboratories when sent by persons holding veterinary or medical qualifications and
on the conditions prescribed in rule 36 above.
37. Cultures or other articles known or believed to contain the living germs of
plague may be transmitted by the inland post subject to the following conditions:-
(a) Such cultures or other articles aforesaid shall not be accepted for transmission
unless they are sent by a commissioned medical officer, a Military Assistant
Surgeon or a Medical Practitioner in possession of a qualification not lower than
that of L.M.S. of the University of Calcutta, the Punjab, Madras or Bombay, or by
a person specially permitted by the Central Government or a State Government to
send such cultures or other articles; not unless they are consigned to a
Government Laboratory or to a person specially permitted by the Central
Government. or a State Government, to send such cultures or other articles: not
unless they are consigned to a Government Laboratory or to a person specially
permitted by the Central Government or a State Government to receive such
cultures or other articles.
(b) The cultures or other articles aforesaid shall be securely packed in a
hermetically closed tin or adequate strength which shall be placed in a strong
outer box of wood or tin with a layer of at least 18 millimetres of raw cotton wool
between the inner and outer case.

--- Page 37 ---
( c) The outer case shall be enclosed in a stout cloth, which shall be securely
fastened and sealed and labeled with such distinguishing inscription as will suffice
to make immediately manifest the nature of the contents.
(d) The sender shall present the parcel at the post office accompanied by a
declaration as to the nature of its contents, and a certificate signed by himself to
the effect that he has advised the addressee of its dispatch and that such addressee,
if the parcel should not be addressed to a Government Laboratory, has been
specially permitted by the Central Government, or a State
Government, to receive such cultures or other articles. The certificate, moreover,
shall show on its face that the sender is a person authorized within the meaning of
clause (a) of this rule to send such cultures or other articles.
37-A. Bottles of anthrax spore vaccine may be transmitted by post by
laboratories permitted by the Central or State Governments to dispatch or receive
such articles and on the conditions prescribed in clauses (b), (c) and (d) to rule 37
above.
38. Strong smelling articles (e.g.. asafoetida) shall be enclosed in a hermetically
sealed case of tin or other metal.
39. Inflammable films, raw or manufactured celluloid shall be packed in a double
receptacle. Such articles shall first be closed, in the case of films, in a hermetically
sealed box of tin and, in the case of celluloid or articles made wholly or partly of
celluloid, in a box of tin, cardboard or wood, the vacant space being completely
filled to prevent any movement of the contents. This box shall then be wrapped
completely all round with padding material in sufficient quantity and placed
inside a wooden box, made of planks not less than 10 mm (3/8 of an inch)
thickness, the sides of which shall be dovetailed, the base and the lid being solidly
screwed to the sides, any intervening space being completely filled with additional
packing material so as to hold the innerrecetable tightly in position to prevent any
rattle. A while label bearing in heavy black characters the indication “Celluloid
keep away from fire and light” shall be affixed to the address side of the parcel.
40. Osmic acid (Osmium tetroxide) may be transmitted by the inland post subject to
the following conditions:-
(a) The acid shall be securely packed in a hermetically sealed stout glass capsule
which shall be embedded in the centre of a tin case filled with fine sand in such a

--- Page 38 ---
manner as to leave a laver of sand not less than 4 centimeters between any part of
the glass capsule and the inside of the tin case.
(b) The outside of the tin case shall be labeled in red letters 6 millimeters high
“OSMIC ACID-DANGEROUS TO HANDLE”.
(c) The tin case shall be soldered down and placed in an outer box of wood or
reasonable strength with a later of at least 25 millimeters of raw cotton wool between
the inner tin case and the outer wooden box.
(d) The outside of the wooden box shall also be labeled in red letter “OSMIC ACID”.
(e) The quantity of the acid enclosed in a capsule shall not exceed two grams and not
more than one capsule shall be enclosed in a parcel.
41. The postage on a parcel shall be fully prepaid. Postage stamps shall be affixed to
or impressions of stamps machines be taken on the cover of parcel or an official label
which can be obtained free at the post office. In cases where postage stamps are
used, the sender or his messenger shall affix the stamps himself.
42. (1) Every parcel intended for transmission by post shall be presented at the
window of the post office. Any article super scribed as “Parcel “ with or without the
words “Registered” or “Unregistered and found in a letter box will be treated as
registered parcel and shall be charged under sub-rule (2) of rule 66, if it is fully
prepaid for postage. If the postage has not been fully prepaid, double the deficiency
in addition to the fee prescribed in sub-rule (2) of rule 66 will be levied, subject to a
minimum of Re. 1/-.
(2) If a parcel containing any of the articles mentioned in clauses (2) and (3) of rule
35 and in rules 36, 37, 37A, 38 & 40 is not packed in the manner prescribed therein, it
shall not be forwarded.
(3) If any parcel in course of transmission through post is found to consist of
anything the transmission of which is in contravention if the provisions of section of
the Act, it shall be detained at the post office nearest to the place at which it is
detected.
(4) If any portion of the contents of the parcel consists of anything the transmission o
f which is in contravention of the provisions aforesaid, the said portion shall be
destroyed by the post office and the remaining portion may, at the request of the
sender, be either repacked by the post office and forwarded to the sender of

--- Page 39 ---
addressee, the necessary additional forwarding charges being collected for this
purpose, or sold by the post office, and in the latter case, the proceeds realized on
sale shall be remitted to the sender after deducting the expenses incurred in
connection with the sale and the charges required for remitting the amount due to
him.
(5) Nothing contained in sub-rule (4) shall affect the liability of the sender in respect
of any contravention committed by him and punishable under section 61 of the Act.
43. Every parcel posted at or addressed to such places as the Director-General may
from time to time, notify in the Post and Telegraph Guide in this behalf, shall be
accompanied by a declaration in such form as may be prescribed by the Director-
General, containing a statement signed by the sender, as to the nature of its contents
and their value.
“Logistic Post”
43-A (1) The Director General may authorize the Heads of Postal Circles to specify,
from time to time , the designated office and designated pace where the articles
called as “Logistic Post Articles” may be booked at or addressed to subject to the
following conditions, namely:-
(a) there shall be no maximum weight limit of logistics post articles;
(b) the minimum charges on Logistics Post Articles shall be the same as charged for a
consignment of such Logistics Post Articles of weight of 50 Kgs;
(c) A special receipt shall be given by the designated office to the person who presents
such Logistics Post Articles for booking at the designated office;’
(d) The weight-volume equivalence to determine the weight for the purpose of rate to
be charged on the Logistics Post Articles shall be such as the Director General may,
from time to time, specify in this behalf;
(e) Logistic Post Articles shall be presented for booking in such a manner that they are
safe for transmission, and secure against pilferage, tampering, manipulation,
damage or leakage;
(f) The charges on Logistics Post Articles shall be determined as specified by the
Director General after taking into consideration, inter alia, service charge, loading,
unloading, brokerage, transportation etc. and charges for any other service to be
provided;

--- Page 40 ---
(g) The charges for Logistics Post Articles shall be fully prepaid except where the
competent authority designated by Director General Posts permit such payment
after the service has been rendered.
(2) No Logistics Post Article shall be accepted for booking if the consignment of such
article contains any contents which are prohibited under the Act / or these rules.
(3) If any Logistics Post Article, in the course of transmission by post is found to
contain anything the transmission of which is in contravention of the provisions of
the Act or these rules, the same shall be detained at any point of transmission at
which it is detected, or at any post office nearest to place at which it is detected, and
shall be further disposed of as the Director General, may from to time, by order,
specify.
(4) Nothing contained in the sub rules (2) and (3) shall affect the liability of the
sunder in respect of any of the acts committed by him , which is punishable under
section 61 of the Act.
(5) Logistics Post Articles shall be booked, transported and delivered in such manner,
and on such conditions, as the Director General may, from time to time, by order,
specify.
Vide GSR 514 (E) dated 10th August, 2004
Prohibited articles.
44. (1) Gold coin or bullion or gold ornaments or articles of gold or both of value
exceeding “one lakh rupees” shall not be transmitted by post. The value for the
purposes of this sub-rule, the second proviso to rule 72, clause (g) of the second proviso
to rule 81 and rule 83A shall be the market value on the date and at the place of posting.
Vide GSR 672 dated 25th August, 2000
(2) [Omitted.]
(3) A postal article containing;
(i) any ticket, proposal or advertisement relating to a lottery organized or authorized by
the Government, or

--- Page 41 ---
(ii) any other matter descriptive of, or otherwise relating to such a lottery which is
calculated to act as an inducement to persons to participate in that lottery, shall not be
transmitted by post unless there appear on the outside of the postal article:-
(a) a declaration by the sender of the postal article that the lottery ticket, proposal,
advertisement or other matter contained in it relates to a lottery organized or
authorized by the Government, mentioning the particulars (number, date etc.) of
the notification by the Government notifying the lottery or authorizing the lottery,
and
(b) the name and the address of the sender.
(4) Omitted.
(5) Omitted.
(6) All classes of articles of the letter mail of which the whole or a part of the address-
side has been marked off into several divisions intended to receive successive
addresses shall not be transmitted by post.
(7) Omitted.
45. If a postal article in course of transmission by post is actually found to contain any
of the articles, the transmission of which by post is prohibited by rule 44, it shall be
returned to the sender.
46. (1) No articles shall be transmitted by post which has thereon, or on the cover
thereof, any matter which is prejudicial to the maintenance of law and order or which
is in furtherance of the aims of a political party or organization, or which tends
directly to cause loss or injury, to any community or class of persons whatsoever.
(1-A) No article shall be transmitted by post which has thereon or on the cover
thereof, any pictorial representation of a person who is a proclaimed offender, or
who has been convicted of an offense punishable under Chapter VI of the Indian
Penal code or the Defence of India Rules or who has been directed to be detained
under the provisions of rule 26 of the said Rules.
(2) If any article in course of transmission by post is found to contravene the
provisions of sub-rule (1), it shall be sent to the office of the Postmaster General,
and shall there be dealt with in the manner provided in section 39 and rules 210 to

--- Page 42 ---
214, as if it were an undelivered postal article which cannot be disposed of under
section 37 or section 38 of the Act.
46-A. (1) No article shall be transmitted by post which has anything written,
printed or otherwise impressed upon or attached to its address-side, which, either
on account of its being likely to be mistaken for stamps used for the payment of
postage or by inconvenient proximity to any such stamp or by tending to prevent
the easy and quick reading of the address or in other way, is in itself or in the
manner in which it is written, printed, impressed or attached, likely, in the opinion
of the Director General, to embarrass the officers of the Post Office in dealing with
such article.
(1a) No article shall be transmitted by post which bears any stamp that was at any
time, but is not now, in use for the payment of postage, or which has printed or
otherwise impressed upon or attached to it, or any part of it, a facsimile, imitation,
likeness, reproduction or representation of such stamp.
(2) If any article in the course of transmission by post is found to contravene the
provisions of sub-rule (1) or (1a) it shall be returned to the sender.
46-B. (1) No article sent in envelopes which are wholly transparent shall be
transmitted by post. Articles in envelopes with a transparent panel may, however,
be transmitted by post provided they conform to the following conditions:-
(a) The transparent panel shall be parallel to the greatest dimension so that the address
of the addressee appears on the same direction and the application of the date-stamp
is not interfered with.
(b) The address shall be clearly legible through the panel and no other communication
shall be visible through the panel so as to affect the clarity of the address.
(2) If any article in the course of transmission is found to contravene the provisions
of Sub-rule (1), it shall be returned to the sender.
46-C. (1) No article shall be transmitted by post in any envelope with an open (cut-
out) panel which does not conform to the following conditions, namely:-
(a) the open (cut-out) panel must not exceed 10cm. in length by 3.5 cm. in breadth;
(b) the panel must extend parallel to the length to the envelope.
(c) a minimum space of 1.5 cm. must be left above the panel for the postage stamp and
the date-stamp and the date-stamp impression;

--- Page 43 ---
(d) no writing or printing other than the address may be visible through the panel and
the address must appear through the panel in such a manner as can be read easily;
(e) the enclosure must be so folded that it cannot move about in the envelope and thus
cause the address to be hidden;
(f) a minimum space of at least 1.5 cm must be left between the sides and base of the
cut-out panel and the respective edges of the envelope.
(2) If during the transmission by post an envelope with an open (cut-out) panel is
found to be not in conformity with the provision of sub-rule (1) , it shall be returned
to the sender.
Redirection of postal articles.
47. (1) Save as otherwise provided in rule 49 and 56 –A a postal article redirected to
any place served by the Inland post by an officer of the Post Office or by an agent of
the addressee after its delivery shall be transmitted by post free of charge in respect of
such further transmission.
Provided that
(a) in the case of an unregistered article redirected by an agent of the addressee the
article has not been opened and has been either returned to the postman or re-posted at
the place of delivery; and
(b) in the case of a registered article redirected by an agent of the addressee, the
article has not been opened and has been returned to the postman at the place of
delivery with the receipt unsigned.
(2) Where a postal article is redirected to any place under the first paragraph of this
rule, the Postmaster at such place may, if authorized by a general or special order in
this behalf issued by the Postmaster-General, require the addressee of the redirected
article to give, a at the time of delivery, a receipt for such article.
48. (1) A postal article re-posted after having been opened, or reposted at any place
other than the place at which it was delivered, shall be treated as a postal articles
posted for the first time, and charged with postage accordingly. A registered article of
which delivery has been taken can be re-posted only under the condition prescribed
for the posting of registered articles for the first time, except that subject to the

--- Page 44 ---
provisions of rule 49, no fresh charge shall be made on account of postage if the article
has not been opened.
(2) If an officer to whom a postal article has been delivered in pursuance of an order
made under section 26 of the Act returns the article to the post office with a view to its
transmission either to the original sender or to the original addressee, the article, shall,
provided it is suitably packed and addressed, be transmitted to its destination by post
free of further charge on account of postage.
49. A parcel redirected to any place served by the Inland Post shall, save where the
original address and the substitute address are within the delivery area of the same
post office, or are within the same post town, or where the parcel has been returned by
the surface route as unclaimed or refused for delivery to the sender within the delivery
of the post office of issue or the same post town, be chargeable in respect of each
redirection with further postage as follows:-
(i) If the parcel is redirected by the surface route, a sum equal to half the amount of
postage chargeable for the transmission of that parcel by the surface route;
(ii) If the parcel is redirected, or returned to the sender by air, a sum as under clause
(i) and in addition the difference between the amount of postage chargeable for
transmission by air, and the amount of postage chargeable for transmission by the
surface route of that parcel.
Suspension or restriction of transmission of postal articles.
49-A The Postmaster General may at any time, in respect of any particular office or
offices, suspend the acceptance or dispatch of all or any of the classes of postal
articles or restrict the number or description or both of all or any of the classes of
postal articles to be accepted or dispatched.
II – FOREIGN POSTAL ARTICLES.
50. The Director General shall, from time to time, notify in the Post Office Guide the
conditions in force for the transmission of postal articles by the Foreign Post;
Provided that the rules relating to inland registered newspapers shall be deemed
to apply in the case of newspapers sent to any foreign county including Ceylon
Nepal and Pakistan.

--- Page 45 ---
50-A. (1) If the addressee of a foreign parcel fails to take delivery of it within ten days
following the date of its first presentation or the date of delivery to him or to his
accredited agent of an intimation of its arrival, a warehousing charge at the rate of
rupee one per day, commencing from the eleventh day, shall be collected from the
addressee at the time of delivery;
Provided that in the case of a parcel bearing an alternative address, if the parcel
cannot be delivered at the original address, the warehousing charge due from the
first addressee shall also be collected from the second addressee at the time of
delivery;
Provided also that the charge shall in no case exceed Rupees twenty four and
fifty paise.
(2) If the addressee of a foreign parcel addressed “Poste Restante” fails to take
delivery of it within ten days following the date of its arrival in the office of delivery,
a warehousing charge at the rate shown in sub-rule (1) shall be collected from the
addressee at the time of delivery;
Provided that the charge shall in no case exceed Rupees forty.
50-B. (1) If the addressee of (a) an inward foreign packet (or bag) or printed papers or
(b) an inward foreign small packet or (c) an inward foreign insured letter or insured
box, fails to take delivery of it within seven days following the date of its first
presentation or the date of delivery to him or to his accredited agent of an intimation
of its arrival, and if its weighs more than 500 grams, a warehousing charge at the rate
of rupees five per day commencing from the eight day, shall be collected from the
addressee at the time of delivery.
Vide GSR 310 (E) dated 12/01/2010
(2) If the addressee of (a) an inward foreign packet (or bag) of printed papers or
business papers, or (b) an inward foreign insured letter or insured box, addressed
“Poste Restante” fails to take delivery of it within seven days following the date of
its arrival in the office of delivery, and if it weighs more than 500 grams, a
warehousing charge at the rate of 35 paise per day, commencing from the eighth day
shall be collected from the addressee at the time of delivery,

--- Page 46 ---
50-C International Speed Post Services:-
(1) Documents or, as the case may be, merchandise may be booked, after
obtaining receipts therefor, under the International Speed Post Documents Service
or the International Speed Post Merchandise Service, respectively.
(2) (a)The documents may be booked at the places and post offices specified
in column (1) of Schedule-I hereto annexed, for delivery under the International
Speed Post Documents Service, in the countries specified in column (2) of that
Schedule subject to the maximum limits of weight and size indicated in column
(3) and (4) thereof.
(b)The charges for delivery of documents under the International Speed Post
Documents Service in the countries mentioned in column (5) of Schedule I shall be
as specified in columns (6) and (7) of the said Schedule.
3. (a) The merchandise may be booked at the places and post offices specified in
column (1) of Schedule II hereto annexed, for delivery under the International
Speed Post Merchandise Service, in the countries spec8ified in column (2) of that
Schedule subject to the maximum limits of weight and size indicated in columns
(3) and (4) thereof.
(b) The charges for delivery of Merchandise under the International Speed Post
Merchandise Service in the countries mentioned in column (5) of Schedule II shall
be as specified in Columns (6) and (7) of the said Schedule.
Explanation:- For the purpose of this rule-
(a) “documents” means documents of any kind containing information or
data in alphabetical, numerical or technical from which are not dutiable or
saleable,
(b) “Merchandise” includes any article or thing (other than documents)
transmissible by post, the insurance of which is not compulsory,
(c) “International Speed Post Documents Service” and “International Speed
Post Merchandise” mean the service, which seek to deliver documents or, as the
case may be, merchandise booked under this rule within stipulated time,
specified in respect of each country from time to time, by a special messenger or
conveyance.

--- Page 47 ---
Explanation: - For the purposes of this rule:-
(a) “Postal articles” shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause (i) of section 2 of
the Indian Post Office Act, 1898 ( 6 of 1898);
Vide GSR 672 (E) dated 25th August 2000
(b) “International Speed Post Service” means the service which seeks to deliver
postal articles within stipulated time, specified in respect of each country from time
to time, by special messenger or conveyance.
Vide S.O 436 (E) dated 24th July, 1986
(3) The weight of a postal article for the International Speed Post Service shall not
exceed 35 kilogram;
Provided that the Director General may prescribe a higher limit of weight of a postal
article for International speed Post service from India to any other country or from any
other country to India.
(4) The size of a postal article for International Speed Post Service shall not exceed 1.50
meters for any one dimension and 3 meters for the sum of the length and the greatest
circumference measured in a direction other than the length.
(5) The Director General may provide insurance to the International Speed Post Service
to such countries as he may notify.
(6) Gold coins, gold ornaments, bullion, precious stones, or jewellery shall be sent by
insured International Speed Post Service and the value of such insurance shall not
exceed one lakh rupees provided that:
The Director General may prescribe higher value of insurance in respect of any
such article.
Vide GSR 672(E) dated 25th August, 2000
51. Every parcel handed to the Post office for transmission by the foreign post shall be
presented at the post office with a declaration, in such form as may be, from time to
time, prescribed by the Director General, containing a statement signed by the sender
as to the nature of its contents and their value. No such parcel shall be accepted if it is
so small or so covered with writing or sealing wax, or otherwise made up in such a
manner, as to render it impracticable to affix to some part of it the form of declaration

--- Page 48 ---
prescribed by the Director General in addition to the official labels to be applied to the
address-side of the parcel.
Explanation: - This rule shall not apply to a parcel which has an address label tied to
it, provided that the label is not so small or so covered with writing as to render it
impracticable to affix to one side of the label of it the form of declaration prescribed by
the Director General in addition to the official labels to be applied to the address-side.
52 Deleted.
52-A. Unpaid or insufficiently prepaid correspondence, other than letters and single
post cards, and reply post cards of which the two halves are not fully prepaid, shall not
be forwarded but shall be returned to the sender. If any such article is not prepaid with
postage applicable to an inland article of the same category, the sender shall be required
to pay double the deficiency in the internal postage.
52-B (1) Letters intended for transmission by foreign post shall not contain any letter,
note or document having the character of current and personal correspondence
exchanged between persons other than the sender and the addressee of the article or
persons living with them in the capacity of family members or bonafide guests.
(2) Letters posted in India which infringe the condition stated in sub-rule (1) shall not be
forwarded to the destination but shall be returned to the sender, each such document
being treated as an unpaid letter at inland rates.
(3) In the case of inward foreign articles which infringe the condition stated in sub rule
(1), double the postage at international rates shall be charged on each individual
document contained in the article and the amount will be realized from the addressee
before delivery.
53. Omitted.

--- Page 49 ---
Treatment of Postal articles from abroad bearing fictitious or previously used stamps
54. Where a postal article has been received by post from any place beyond the limits of
India, bearing a fictitious or previously used postage stamp and the addressee of such
postal article has failed to attend, by himself or his agent, at the post office of delivery
within the time specified in the notice sent to him in that behalf, or, having so attended,
has refused to make known the name and addressee of the sender or to re-deliver the
postal article or such portion thereof as may be required under section 27 of the Act,
and, in consequence of such failure or refusal, the postal article has not been delivered
to the addressee or his agent, the postal article shall be disposed of in the following
manner:-
The officer in charge of the post office at which the postal article has been
received for delivery shall record a statement, in such form as the Director General shall
prescribe, setting forth action taken by him under provisions of section 27 of the Act,
and the fact of such failure or refusal as aforesaid on the part of the addressee or his
agent; and shall forward the statement, together with the postal article, through the
usual channel to the Director General.
The Director General shall then, in due course, transmit the statement together with the
postal article, to the Postal administration of the place beyond the limits of India from
which the article was received.
III – AIR MAIL ARTICLES
55. Letters, post cards Aerogramme, air letter, packets and parcel may be accepted at
any post office for transmission by air, subject to such exceptions as the Director
General shall, from time to time, notify in the Post and Telegraph Guide.
56. Deleted

--- Page 50 ---
56-A. The redirection of surcharged air mail correspondence, both inland and foreign,
shall be subject to the payment of air mail fees prescribed in rules 2 & 6 and such other
conditions as the Director General, from time to time, notify in the Post and Telegraph
guide.
56-B. In the case of a reply-paid post card received from abroad if the addressee wishes
to send the reply by airmail, he should affix to the reply half of the card, postage stamps
equal in value to the difference between the airmail postage rate for the country of
destination and the surface postage rate for a single postcard.
57. The use of the special stamps which are issued for prepaying the air mail fee or the
postage, registration fee and the air mail fee combined, on an air mail article, shall be
optional. Such stamps shall not be recognized by the Post office in payment of postage
on articles for transmission by routes other than by air.
PART III – REGISTRATION OF POSTAL ARTICLES
I– INLAND POSTAL ARTICLES
58. Letters, letter cards, book and pattern packets, parcels and newspapers prepaid with
postage at newspaper rates of postage may be registered at any post office for
transmission by post to any other post office.
59. In addition to the postage, a fee of Seventeen rupees shall be charged for the
registration of any postal article:
Provided that no fee shall be charged for the registration of a “Blind Literature”
packet.
Provided further that a fee of Rs.2.50/- only shall be charged for the registration
of a value payable book packet containing printed books, the printed or stamped value
whereof does not exceed Rs. 50/-.

--- Page 51 ---
Provided further that the concession specified in the second proviso shall not be
admissible unless the price is either printed or stamped on the printed book or books as
the case may be.
60. The prepayment of the postage and registration fees is obligatory in the case of
all registered articles.
61. (1) An article intended for registration shall be presented at the window of the post
office. No such article shall be accepted for registration if it is so small or so covered with
writing or sealing-wax on the address-side, or otherwise made up in such a manner, as
to render it impracticable to affix to the article the official labels prescribed by the
Director General.
No such article shall also be accepted for registration-
(a) Where it contains words to the effect that it has been or is intended to be insured for
any specific sum or that it may contain valuable contents, unless it is also to be
insured, or
(b) Where such words are scored out.
(c) Unless it bears the name and complete address of the sender on the outside along
with the pin-code, provided that the registered article which does not bear a pin-code
may be accepted if according to the judgment of the person accepting the article the
name of the area of the delivery post office serving the sender’s address is otherwise
clearly mentioned.
Explanation:- This sub-rule shall not apply to an article which has an address- label
tied to it, provided that the label is not so small or so covered with writing on the
address-side as to render it impracticable to affix to that side the official labels
prescribed by the Director-General.
(2) No parcel shall be accepted for registration unless it bears the name and address
of the sender written on the cover.
(3) If the Postmaster General is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to do to
meet the rush of work in a Night Post Office or a Mobile Post Office and to ensure the
equitable availability of facilities provided therein to all persons, he may, by notice

--- Page 52 ---
displayed on the notice board of such Post Office, restrict the number of registered
articles that may be tendered for booking by any person at one time at such post
office during such hours as may be specified in the notice.
62. A receipt shall be given to the person who presents an article for registration at
the post office window during the hours prescribed for posting registered articles.
63. No registered article shall be delivered to the addressee unless and until he or his
agent has signed a receipt for it in such form as the Director General shall prescribe.
64. (1) If the sender of a registered article pays at the time of positing the article a fee
of rupee three in addition to the postage and registration fee, there shall be sent to
him on the delivery of the article a form of acknowledgment which shall be signed in
ink by the addressee or his duly authorized agent or if the addressee refuses to so
sign shall be accompanied by statement to the effect that the addressee or his duly
authorized agent has refused to so sign:
` Provided that no fee shall be payable in respect of a registered “Blind Literature”
packet for which an acknowledgement is required.
(2) No article for which an acknowledgment is required under sub-rule(1) shall be
accepted for registration unless it bears the name and address of the sender and is
accompanied by a prescribed form of acknowledgment duly filled in and securely
fastened to such article, and unless the article bears the superscription
Acknowledgment Due on the address side.
65. The sender of a registered article may obtain an attested copy of the original
receipt signed by the addressee to his duly authorized agent on payment of a special
fee of rupee two provided that he makes his application for it within six months of
the date on which the addressee or his duly authorized agent signed the original
receipt.
Vide GSR 23 (E) dated 11th January 2002

--- Page 53 ---
Provided that no fee shall be payable in respect of a registered “Blind Literature”
packet for issue of an attested copy of the original receipt signed by the addressee or
his duly authorized agent.
66. (1) Registration shall be obligatory in the case of -
(a) Any parcel exceeding 4 kilograms in weight or any parcel booked under Express
Parcel Post.
GSR 793 (E) dated 7th November 1994
(b) Any insured article.
(c) Any parcel addressed to a place for which a customs declaration is required.
(d) Any article bearing the word “registered” or any word, phrase, or mark to the like
effect written or impressed on the cover.
(e) Any registered article which is re-posted after having been delivered.
(f) Any value-payable article.
(g) Any magazine or periodical printed or published abroad but posted in India and
whose price per copy exceeds rupees 20/-.
Exception 1 :- Nothing in this rule shall be held to render registration of a packet
compulsory only by reason that it contains a stamped envelope, post card or wrapper
as provided by rule 19 (c).
Exception 2:- Nothing in this rule shall be held to render compulsory registration of a
Flat Rate Parcel only by reason that it exceeds 4 kilograms in weight”
Vide GSR 63 (E) February 2011
66-A. Omitted.
66-B (1)INLAND SPEED POST SERVICE:- Inland Postal articles may be booked,
after obtaining receipts therefor, at the places specified in column (1) of the Schedule
below and at the post offices specified in the corresponding entries in column (2) of
the said Schedule, for delivery under the Inland Speed Post Service, subject to the
following conditions, namely:-
(1) Inland Speed Post Service shall be available in respect of all classes of mails,
which can be sent by registered service:

--- Page 54 ---
(2) Inland Speed Post tariff shall be as under:-
Weight Local Up to 201 to 1001 to Above
(within 200kms 1000kms. 2000kms.
municipal
limits)
(i) Upto 50 Rs.15 Rs.35 Rs.35 Rs.35 Rs.35
grams
(ii) 51 grams to Rs.25 Rs.35 Rs.40 Rs.60 Rs.70
200 grams
(iii) 201 grams to Rs.30 Rs.50 Rs.60 Rs.80 Rs.90
500 grams
(iii) Additional Rs.10 Rs.15 Rs.30 Rs.40 Rs.50
500 grams or
part thereof
The above tariff will be exclusive of taxes. The taxes will have to be paid extra as
notified by the Central Government from time to time.
(iv) Proof of Delivery charges for speed post articles shall be rupees ten per Speed
Post article in addition to Speed Post charge”.
Vide GSR 734 (E) 1st October 2012
(3) articles for booking under this service shall prominently bear on, the front the
superscription “INALAND SPEED POST” and shall also bear the name and
address of the sender in addition to that of the addresses, including the PIN codes
of the Post Offices of deliver serving the addressee and the sender and their
telephone number , if any:
(4) complaints regarding any article booked under this service (including a demand
for refund of fees in cases of non-delivery of articles within the stipulated time)
may be preferred within three months from the date of booking of the articles and
shall inter alia contain the number of the article , the date booking and the name of
the office of booking:

--- Page 55 ---
(5) there will be no delivery of these articles on Sundays and other holidays in the
post offices concerned.
Explanation:- For the purposes of this rule “Inland Speed Post Service means the
service which seeks to deliver postal articles within stipulated time, specified in
respect of each city or town, as the case may be from time to time, by a special
messenger or conveyance.
In case of delay in delivery of domestic speed post articles beyond the norms
determined by the Department of Post from time to time, the compensation to be
provided shall be equal to the composite speed post charges paid.
In the event of loss of domestic speed post article or loss of its contents or damage
to the contents, compensation shall be double the amount of composite speed post
charges paid of Rs. 1,000 whichever is less.
Vide GSR 40 (E) dated 21st January, 1999
SCHEDULE
Name of Place Names of post offices
1. Delhi 1.Lodi Road H.O
2. Parliament Street H.O
3. Delhi G.P.O
4. Palam TMO
2. Bombay 1.Bombay GPO
2. Nariman Point P.O
3. Dadar H.O
4. Bombay Airport Stg. Office
5.Bombay central TMO (for Ahmadabad
only
3.Calcutta 1. Calcutta GPO
2. Bara Bazar H.O
3. Park Street H.O
4. Calcutta Air Sorting
4.Madras 1.Madrea G.P.O
2.Anna Road H.O
3. T.T.Nagar
4.Madras APSO
5. Madras Sorting

--- Page 56 ---
5.Bangalore 1.Bangalore G.P.O
2.Bangalore City H.O
3.Bangalore City RMS ( For Madras only)
6.Hyderabad 1.Hyderabad G.P.O
2. Secunderabad H.O
3. Hyderabad Air Stg.
7.Ahmedabad 1. Ahmadabad G.P.O
2.Ahmedabad Railwaypura P.O
3.Ahmedabad RMS
(6) The weight of an article for the Inland Speed Post Service shall not exceed 35
kilograms provided that:
The Director General may, prescribed a higher limit of weight of an article for Inland
Speed Post Service.
(7) The size of a postal article for Inland Speed Post Service shall not exceed 1.50
metres for any one dimension or 3 metres for the sum of the length and the greatest
circumference measured in a direction other than the length.
(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (d) of rule 33-A, door-to-door
service shall be provided irrespective of the weight of an article for Inland Speed Post
Service.
Vide GSR 672 (E) dated 25th August, 2000
I. FOREIGN POSTAL ARTICLES.
67. Letters, air letters, post cards and packets may be registered at any post office for
transmission to countries and places served by the foreign post, subject to such
exceptions as the Director General shall, from time to time, notify in the Post and
Telegraph Guide.
68. In addition to the postage, the fees specified in column 2 of the Table below shall
be charged for the registration of the articles (sent by foreign post) specified on the
corresponding entry in column 1 of the said Table:

--- Page 57 ---
Provided that no fees shall be payable for the registration of a “Blind Literature”
packet to be sent by the foreign post.
TABLE
(i) Letter, air letter, Post card Fifty Rupees
and packet
(ii) Bulk bag of printed matter Two Hundred Rupees
Vide GSR 310 (E) dated 12 th April 2010
69. (1) A parcel intended to be sent foreign post shall be presented at the window
of the post office and a receipt shall be given to the person who presents such
parcel.
(2) No parcel received in India by foreign post shall be delivered to the addressee
unless and until he or his agent has signed a receipt for it.
70. Rules 60, 61, 62 and 63 relating to the registration of inland postal articles,
shall be equally applicable to registered articles sent or received by the foreign
post.
71. (1) The sender of a registered article posted in India and addressed to any
country belonging to the Universal Postal Union shall be entitled to apply for an
advice of delivery at the time of posting by paying a fee, in addition to the
postage and registration fee, at the rates indicated below:-
TABLE
Fee
Registered articles For Bhutan and For other foreign
Nepal countries
1. For “Blind Literature” Packets Nil Nil
2. For other than “Blind Literature “ Rs. 5.00 Rs. 10.00
Packets
Vide GSR 310 (E) dated 12th April 2010

--- Page 58 ---
(2) When the sender inquires about an advice of delivery which he has not
received within the normal period, neither a second advice of delivery fee nor
the fee prescribed in rule 71-A for inquiries and requests for information shall be
collected.
71-A (1) Inquires and Requests for information shall be entertained within a
period of a year from the day after that on which the article was posted.
(2) When the sender of a registered article posted in India and addressed to any
country belonging to the Universal Postal Union has not paid the fee for an
acknowledgement of its delivery (rule 71) and desires to have an enquiry made
by the post Office regarding the disposal of article, he shall be entitled to this
service on payment of a fee as indicated below:-
TABLE
Fee
Registered articles For Bhutan and For other foreign
Nepal countries
1. For “Blind Literature” Packets only Nil Nil
2. For articles other than “Blind Rs. 5.00 Rs. 10.00
Literature “ Packets
Vide GSR 310 (E) dated 12th April 2010
Provided that if a request is made for transmission by telegraph, the cost
of the telegram and where applicable of the reply shall be collected in addition to
the inquiry fee.
(3) If the sender or addressee of a registered article posted in any country
belonging to the Universal Postal Union other than India and addressed to a
place in another country belonging to the Universal Postal Union desires that the
Indian Postal Administration should forward his enquiry regarding the disposal
of the articles to the administration of origin, he shall be entitled to this service
on payment of the fees mentioned in sub-rule (2) above.

--- Page 59 ---
(4) A single enquiry fee shall be levied when the enquiry relates to several
registered articles posted at the same time by the same sender to the same
addressee. This will not however, apply in the case of registered articles posted
in India and addressed to Bhutan, Nepal or Pakistan. However, in the case of
registered articles which had, at sender’s request, to be forwarded by different
routes, separate fee shall be collected for each of the routes used.
(5) If the inquiry or request for information has been occasioned by service error,
the fees collected for it shall be refunded.
PART IV – INSURANCE OF POSTAL ARTICLES
I- INLAND POSTAL ARTICLES
72. (1) Registered letters, value payable registered letters, registered parcels and
value payable registered parcels may be insured up to the value of Rs. 600/- at
such branch post offices, and up to the value of Rs. 1,00,000/- at such other post
offices, as may be authorized by the Postmaster General to accept articles for
insurance and for such post offices as may be authorized by the Postmaster
General to deliver insured articles:
Note:- Where currency notes are dispatched by insured post the value shall not
exceed Rs. 20,000/-.
Provided that in no case shall such value exceed the real value of the contents of
the article insured:
Provided also that articles containing Government currency notes or bank notes
or gold coin or bullion or gold ornaments or articles of gold any combination of
these shall be insured for the actual value of the contents.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (1), the insurance of all value
payable articles on which the amount specified for recovery exceeds Rs. 500/-

--- Page 60 ---
,other than excepted articles, shall be compulsory for at least the amount specified
for recovery from the addressee.
Explanation: - In this rule “excepted articles” mean:-
(a) Value-payable packets;
(b) Value-payable letters containing railway goods receipts, legal documents, bonds,
policies of insurance, promissory notes, bills of lading or ordinary bills for
collection, which have no intrinsic value.
73. Insurance shall cover all risks in course of transmission by post.
74. In addition to the postage and the fee for registration the following further
fees shall be charged for insurance:-
When the value insured does not exceed Rs. 200/- Rs. 10/-
For every additional Rs. 100/- or fraction thereof Rs. 6/-
in excess of Rs. 200/-
Vide GSR 503-(E) dated 19th August 1998
75. The prepayment of all charges on insured articles, namely, postage,
registration fees and insurance fees, shall be compulsory Postage stamps affixed
to an insured article must be placed apart from one another so that they may not
serve to conceal injuries to the cover of the letter or parcel.
76. (1) every letter tendered for insurance shall be enclosed either--
(i) in a strong cover securely fastened and sealed with fine wax bearing a private
mark, in such a way that it cannot be opened without breaking the seal or
leaving traces of violation; or
(ii) in a fastened tear and water resistant envelop made up in one piece, and
allowing the seals or adhesive tape to adhere completely, having tamper evident
adhesive tape with a window on flap containing logo of the Department of Posts

--- Page 61 ---
with words ‘Void Open’ and capable of leaving indelible impressions of
tampering and die cut marks on seams,
With the stipulation that—
(a) Not more than one non-postal stamp or label of any kind not exceeding
two and a half centimeter by two and a half centimeter in size (2.5cmx2.5cm)
shall be affixed by the sender to such a cover;
(b) The envelope with black or coloured borders shall not to be used; and
(c) Wherever, a letter in a cover securely fastened and sealed with fine wax
bearing a private mark is tendered, seals shall be placed over each flap or seam
of the cover, and if the cover is tied round with string or tape, a seal shall be
placed on the ends where they are tied.
(1A) The specification and design of water tear resistant envelope referred to in
item (ii) of sub-section (1) shall be approved by the Director General, Department
of Posts and shall bear particulars of approval and details of manufacturer on the
reverse of the envelop.”
Vide GSR 532 (E) 3rd August 2007
(2) Every parcel tendered for insurance must be packed carefully and
substantially, with due regard to the nature of the contents and the length of the
journey, and must be sealed with wax or lead, bearing a private mark, in such a
way that it cannot be opened without either breaking the seal or leaving obvious
traces of violation. Seals must be placed over each joint or loose flap of the
covering of a parcel; and, if string be used in packing, a seal must be placed on
the ends of the string where they are tied. If a parcel contains gold or silver
bullion or coins, it must be placed in a strong case of wood or metal with an
outer covering of cloth or stout paper.

--- Page 62 ---
(3) All the seals affixed to an insured postal article shall be of the same kind of
wax and shall bear distinct impressions of the same device. The device shall not
be that of a current coin or merely a series of straight, curved, or crossed lines.
77. No postal article shall be accepted at any post office for insurance if it is so
small or so covered with writing or sealing wax on the address side, or otherwise
made up in such a manner, as to render it impracticable to affix to the article the
official labels prescribed by the Director General .
Explanation:- This rule shall not apply to an article which has an address label
tried to it provided that the label is not so small or so covered with writing on the
address side as to render it impracticable to affix to that side the official labels
prescribed by the Director General.
78. An article intended of insurance shall be presented at the window of the post
office with the amount for which the sender wished it to be insured, clearly
written in words and figures, without erasure or correction, on the cover. The
name and address of the sender shall also be written on the cover in the lower
left hand corner, or on a separate slip of paper, to be presented with the article,
should there be no room for his name and address on the cover.
79. A receipt shall be given to the person who presented an article for insurance
at the post office window during three hours prescribed for posting insured
articles.
80. The sender of an insured article shall be entitled to obtain free of charge an
acknowledgement of its delivery signed by the addressee or his duly authorized
agent.
81. There shall be payable to the sender of an insured postal article compensation
not exceeding the amount for which the article has been insured, for the loss of
the postal article or any of its contents or for any damage caused to it in course of
transmission by post:
Provided that the compensation shall in no case exceed the value of the
article or any of its contents lost or the amount of the damage caused, and

--- Page 63 ---
provided that in the case of loss the sender shall furnish full particulars of the
contents of the postal article and their value:
Provided, also, that no compensation shall be payable-
(a) where there has been misdelivery arising out of incorrectness or
incompleteness of the address written by the sender;
(b) where there has been fraud on the part of the sender or addressee;
(c) where the insured article has been delivered to the addressee and he has
signed and returned the receipt therefor;
(d) where the sender has not given, intimation of the loss within three months
from the date of posting;
(e) where the loss or damage was due to improper or insecure packing;
(f) where there is no visible damage to the cover or seals;
(g) where the insured article contains government currency notes, bank notes,
gold coin or bullion or any combination of these, both and has not been
insured for the actual value of the contents;
(h) in the case of the loss of halves of currency notes;
(i) in the case of damage arising from the nature of the article insured, or
(j) where the insured article contained anything the transmission of which by
post is prohibited.
82. Compensation shall be payable one month after the date on which
intimation of loss is given by the sender to the Post Office except in cases in
which the Postmaster –General may consider that the circumstances demand
the withholding of payment pending inquiry.
83. Coin, bullion, platinum, precious stones, jewellery, currency notes and
articles of gold or silver may be sent by post only in insured letters or insured
parcels. If a letter or parcel presented at the post office window is found to
contain any such object of value, it shall not be accepted for transmission by
post, unless the sender insures it, and if an uninsured article manifestly
containing any such object of value is found in course of transmission by post it

--- Page 64 ---
shall be either intercepted and returned to the sender or forwarded to
destination and delivered to the addressee subject to the payment of a fee of
two rupees. The payment of this fee shall not impose any liability on the
Central Government.
Explanation:- In this rule, the expression “articles of gold or silver” includes articles
made wholly or partly of gold or silver, but not coins and electro or other plated
goods. The expression “coin” does not include cut counterfeit coin remitted on
behalf of the currency Department and Mints. The expression “Currency notes” does
not include defaced note, i.e notes from which the signature has been cut off after
cancellation, remitted on behalf of the Currency Department. The expression
jewellery includes watches the cases of which are entirely or mainly composed of
gold, silver or platinum.
83-A. In the case of articles containing Government currency notes, bank notes, gold
coin, bullion or gold ornaments or articles of gold or any combination of these the
sender should declare on the article the value of the contents at the time of dispatch.
II- FOREIGN POSTAL ARTICLES.
84. (1) The Director General shall, from time to time, notify in the post Office Guide
the countries and places for transmission to which registered letters containing
jewellery or valuable, value-payable registered letters, parcels and value-payable
parcels may be insured, and the limit up to which such letters or parcels may be
insured in each case.
(1A) The Director General shall also, from time to time, notify in the Post Office
Guide the countries and places with which value payable postal articles under value
payable system and value payable postal articles under cash-on-delivery system may
be charged.
Provided that in no case shall such value exceed the real value of the contents of
the letter, or parcel insured.

--- Page 65 ---
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (1), the insurance of all foreign
value payable articles or cash on delivery parcels on which the amount specified for
recovery exceeds Rs. 100 or L 2, other than excepted articles, shall be compulsory for
their transit in India for at least the amount specified for recovery from the addressee
and the fee charged for such insurance shall be as mentioned in sub – rule (1) of rule
92.
(3) In an uninsured foreign value-payable article or cash on delivery parcel on which
the amount specified for recovery exceeds Rs. 100 or L 2 other than excepted
articles, is received from any foreign country, the article shall be forwarded to
destination by the inward foreign office of exchange as an insured article and
delivered to the addressee subject to the payment of an insurance fee calculated in
the manner prescribed in sub-rule (2) of rule 92 on the amount specified for
recovery.
Explanation:- In this rule “exceptional articles” mean:-
(a) Value-payable packets;
(b) Value-payable letters containing railway goods receipts, legal documents, bonds,
policies of insurance, promissory notes, bills of lading or ordinary bills for collection,
which have no intrinsic value.
85. In addition to postage and, in the case of letters, apart from the registration fee,
the following further fees shall be charged for insurance:-
(a) when the value insured does not exceed Rs. 500/-, Rs.10.00
(b) When the value insured exceeds Rs. 500/- for every additional Rs. 500/- or
fraction thereof upto Rs. 20,000/- Rs.10.00
86. The prepayment of all charges on insured foreign registered letters, and parcels
shall be compulsory. Postage stamps affixed to letters or parcels intended for
insurance must be placed apart from one another, so that they may not serve to
conceal injuries to the cover of the letter, insured box or parcel. No label of any kind
shall be affixed by the sender to cover of a letter intended for insurance.

--- Page 66 ---
87. (1) every letter tendered for insurance shall be enclosed either—
(i) in a strong cover securely fastened and sealed with fine wax bearing a private
mark, in such a way that it cannot be opened without breaking the seal or leaving
traces of violation; or
(ii) in a fastened tear and water resistant envelop made up in one piece, and
allowing the seals or adhesive tape to adhere completely, having tamper evident
adhesive tape with a window on flap containing logo of the Department of Posts
with words ‘Void Open’ and capable of leaving indelible impressions of tampering
and die cut marks on seams,
With the stipulation that—
(a) not more than one non-postal stamp or label of any kind not exceeding two and a
half centimeter by two and a half centimeter in size (2.5 cm x 2.5 cm) shall be affixed
by the sender to such a cover;
(b) the envelope with black or coloured borders shall not be used;
(c) wherever, a letter in a cover securely fastened and sealed with fine wax bearing a
private mark is tendered, seals shall be placed over each flap or seam of the cover,
and if the cover is tied round with string or tape, a seal shall be placed on the ends
where they are tied; and
(d) the envelope shall not contain any coin platinum, gold or silver, manufactured or
not, precious stone, jewels and other valuable articles.
(1A) The specification and design of water tear resistant envelope referred to in
time(ii) of sub-section (1) shall be approved by the Director General, Department of
Posts and shall bear particulars of approval and details of manufacturer on the
reverse of the envelop.
Vide GSR 532 (E) 3rd August 2007

--- Page 67 ---
(2) Deleted.
(3) Every foreign parcel tendered for insurance must be packed carefully and
substantially, with due regard to the weight and nature of the contents as well as the
mode of transport and the length of the journey and must be sealed with wax or lead
or by other effective seals bearing a private mark, in such a way that it cannot be
opened without either breaking the seal or leaving obvious traces of violation. The
wax, lead or other seals and the labels of whatever kind and any postage stamps
affixed to insured parcels must be so spaced that they cannot conceal injuries to the
cover. Labels and postage stamps, if any, must not be folded over the two sides of
the cover so as to hide the edge. Address-labels, if any, must not be pasted on the
cover itself. Seals must be placed over such joint or lose flap of the covering of a
parcel; and , if string be used in packing, a seal must be placed on the ends of the
string where they are tied. If a parcel contains coin, bank notes, currency notes,
bearer bonds, platinum, gold or silver (manufactured or not), precious stones jewels
or other precious objects, it shall be packed in a strong case of wood or metal with an
outer covering of cloth or stout paper.
(4) All the seals affixed to an insured foreign letter or parcel or insured box shall be
of the same kind of wax (or lead in the case of parcels) and shall bear distinct
impressions of the same private device. The device shall not be that of a current coin
or merely a series of straight, curved or crossed lines.
88. No foreign letter or parcel shall be accepted at any post office for insurance if it is
so small or so covered with writing or sealing wax on the address-side, or otherwise
made up in such a manner, as to render it impracticable to affix to it the official
labels prescribed by the Director General.
Explanation:- This rule shall not apply to a letter, or parcel which has an address
label tied to it, provided that the label is not so small or so covered with writing on
the address side as to render it impracticable to affix to that side the official labels
prescribed by the Director General.

--- Page 68 ---
89. A foreign letter or parcel intended for insurance shall be presented at the window
of the post office with the amount for which the sender wishes it to be insured clearly
written, in words and figures without erasures or correction, on the cover and
accompanied by such form or forms duly filled up as may be prescribed by the
Director General, from time to time, in the Post Office Guide. The name and address
of the addressee of a foreign letter, or parcel intended for insurance shall be written in
ink on the actual cover of the article. Letters and boxes addressed to initials or
directed in pencil or bearing at the time of posting erasures or corrections in the
address shall not be forwarded.
90. A receipt shall be given to the person who presents a foreign letter, or parcel for
insurance at the window of the post office during the hours prescribed for posting
insured foreign articles.
91. (1) When a foreign letter or a foreign parcel, has been posted in and insured by an
Indian Post Office within or without the limits of India and when such letter, or parcel
has been lost or the contents thereof have abstracted or damaged in the course of
transmission by post compensation not exceeding the amount for which such letter, or
parcel has been insured shall be payable, in accordance with and subject to the
provisions of sub-rule (2), (4) and (5) on account of such loss, abstraction or damage,
to the sender except in the case of a parcel in respect of which the Administration of
the country of destination decides to pay compensation to the addressee under the
same conditions as those prescribed in respect of the Indian Post Office in sub-rule (3).
Provided that no compensation shall be paid in respect of a parcel sent by or
addressed to:-
(1) a prisoner of war either directly or through a national information bureau or
central information agency referred to in a Geneva convention of the 12th august ,
1949, relative to the treatment of prisoners of war:
(2) a belligerent received and interned in neutral country;

--- Page 69 ---
(3) a civilian internee as defined in the Geneva Convention of the 12th August, 1949,
relative to the protection of civilian persons in time of war, either directly or through
a National Bureau or in Central Information Agency referred to in that Convention ;
and
4) a National Bureau or a Central Information Agency regarding prisoners of war.
(2) Whether or not the addressee has made reservations on taking delivery of a letter
the contents of which have been abstracted or damaged, or has, after taking
delivery thereof, immediately made a complaint of abstraction or damage to the
Administration of the office of delivery and proved that the abstraction or damage
did not take place after the delivery, the compensation payable under sub-rule (1)
shall be payable to the sender and no claim for the payment of compensation to the
addressee shall be entertained.
(3) When an inward parcel insured by a foreign Administration is lost or the
contents thereof are abstracted or damaged, compensation shall be payable by the
Indian Post Office to the addressee up to an amount not exceeding that for which it
has been insured if he claims such compensation after having made reservation in
taking delivery of the parcel or if he furnished proof that the sender of the parcel has
waived his rights to such compensation in the addressee’s favour.
(4) The compensation payable under sub-rule (1) to (3) shall in no case exceed the
value of the article lost or the amount of loss occasioned by the abstraction of, or
damage to, the contents of the article, and loss of profits or other indirect loss shall
not be taken into consideration in the assessment of such compensation.
(5) No compensation shall be payable under sub-rule (1) to (3)-
(a) where the loss or damage has been caused by the fault or negligence of the sender,
or arises from the nature of the article;
(b) where the insurance has fraudulently made for a sum above the real value of the
contends, or there has been any other fraud on the part of the sender or the
addressee;

--- Page 70 ---
(c) where the insured article has been delivered to the addressee, or where the article
is returned to the sender and the addressee or sender, as the case may be, has signed
and returned the receipt therefor without protest, or in the case of an insured letter,
without immediately making a complaint of abstraction of or damage to the contents
of the letter to the administration of the office which delivered the article and proving
that the abstraction or damage took place before the delivery of the letter;
(d) where the sender has not given intimation of the loss, abstraction or damage
within one year following the day of posting;
(e) where the loss, abstraction or damage was due to improper or insecure packing;
(f) where there is no visible damage to the cover or seals;
(g) in cases beyond control (e.g, tempest, shipwreck, earthquake, war, etc.);
(h) where the insured article cannot be traced in consequence of the destruction of
the documents relating to it from causes beyond control unless proof of liability of
the post office to pay compensation in respect of the article has been furnished
otherwise;
(i) where the insured article contained anything the transmission of which by the
letter or the parcel post, as the case may be, is prohibited, provided that
compensation shall not be inadmissible by reason only of the fact that an insured
parcel contained any correspondence;
(j) where the insured article is seized under any law for the time being in force in
the country of destination.
(6) In the following cases, namely:-
(a) when an insured letter or box or parcel is lost or destroyed or its contents are
wholly abstracted;
(b) when by reason of damage attributable to the postal service the addressee refuses
to take delivery of an insured parcel;
The sender of such letter, box or parcel, shall be further entitled to a refund of the
charges and fees which have been paid, and when an error on the part of the Post

--- Page 71 ---
Office gives rise to enquiry as to disposal of such letter, or parcel, to a refund of,
any fee paid on account of such enquiry; but the sender of such letter, box or parcel
shall in no case be entitled to a refund of the fee paid for insurance.
(7) The Central Government does not accept any liability to the sender or the
addressee, other than that mentioned in sub-rules (1) to (6), in respect of loss of an
insured inward or outward foreign letter, or parcel or the abstraction of, or damage
to, the contents thereof.
92. (1) (a) A letter containing currency notes or bank notes and a parcel containing
coin, bullion, platinum, precious stones, jewellery or articles of gold or silver, bank
notes, currency notes, securities of any kind payable to bearer shall not be accepted
for transmission by foreign post unless the sender also agrees to insure it.
Provided that in the case of an Insured Letter containing currency notes or bank
notes, or an Insured Box containing bullion or gold coin or an Insured Box
containing bullion or gold coin or an Insured Parcel containing gold coin, bullion,
currency notes or bank notes or any combination of such articles, it shall be insured
for the actual value of its contents;
(2) Where a foreign parcel contains coin, bullion, bank notes, currency notes or any
kind of securities payable to bearer, platinum , precious stones, jewellery or
articles of gold or silver, and a letter containing currency notes or banknotes is
addressed to a country or place to which insurance is not available, the parcel
shall be insured for its inland transit within the limits of India, and in such cases
the fee charged for insurance shall be calculated as follows,
Where the value insured does not exceed Rs. 500.. Rs. 10.00/-
When the value insured exceeds Rs. 500/-
for every additional Rs. 500/- or fraction thereof upto Rs. 20,0000 Rs. 10.00/-
Provided that in the case of parcels containing gold coin, bullion, currency notes
or bank notes or any combination of such articles and a letter containing

--- Page 72 ---
currency notes or bank notes, such insurance for inland transit shall also be for
the actual value of the contents.
(3) If an uninsured foreign postal article declared to contain or manifestly
containing any of the objects of the value specified in sub-rule (1), is received from
a foreign country, the parcel shall be forwarded to destination and delivered to the
addressee subject to the payment of a fee calculated in the manner prescribed in
sub-rule (1) on the declared value of the contents or on the value assessed by the
Customs authorities, whichever is higher. If refused by the addressee, it shall be
returned to the country of origin.
(4) Nothing in this rule shall be deemed to authorize the transmission by post
of anything which is otherwise prohibited from transmission by post.
Explanation.- In this rule the expression “articles of gold or silver” includes articles
made wholly or partly of gold or silver, but not electro or other plated goods. The
expression “jewellery” includes watches the cases of which are entirely or mainly
composed of gold, silver or platinum.
93. Where an insured foreign parcel, which has been redirected or returned as
undeliverable, is received in India subject to a fresh insurance fee by reason of its
having been so redirected or returned, such fee shall be recoverable on delivery as
if it were postage due under the Act.
PART V – VALUE PAYABLE POST
I – INLAND POSTAL ARTICLES
94. Registered parcels, registered letters, registered book packets and newspapers
prepaid with postage at newspaper rates of postage and with registration fee may be
transmitted by the inland post as value payable postal articles, provided that the
amount specified for remittance to the sender in the case of any such postal article
shall not exceed Rs. 5000/- and shall not include a fraction of a Rupee and provided

--- Page 73 ---
that such parcels, letters and packets do not contain coupons, tickets, certificates or
introductions designed for the sale of goods on what is known as the “Snowball
system”.
95. No such postal article as aforesaid shall be accepted at any post office for
transmission by post as a value payable postal article unless the sender declares that
it is sent in execution to a bona fide order received by him. At any post office
notified from time to time in this behalf by the Director General, the sender shall, in
addition, be required to declare that the article is one the transmission of which by
post as a value payable postal article is permitted. No postal article as aforesaid
shall be accepted at these offices without such further declaration.
Explanation:- An article may be sent by the value-payable post even though it
possesses no intrinsic value. Thus, legal documents, bonds, policies of insurance,
promissory notes, railway goods and parcel receipts, bills of lading or ordinary bills
for collection may be sent as value-payable postal articles. In the case of a railway
receipt or bill of lading sent as a value-payable postal article it will be sufficient for
the purposes of this rule if the article to which the railway receipt or bill of lading
relates has been sent in execution of a bona fide order. In the case of the other
documents specified the documents must be sent in execution of a bona fide order to
send the document itself.
96. (1) Every postal article intended to be transmitted by post as a value-payable
postal article shall be presented at the post office with a printed form, prescribed by
the Director – General and obtainable at the post office, in which the sender shall
specify the sum to be remitted to himself, fill in the required entries in ink, and sign
the declaration required by rule 95. The sender of a postal article intended to be
transmitted by post as value-payable shall write clearly on the face of the article
itself.

--- Page 74 ---
(a) in the upper left-hand corner – the letters “V.P.” followed by an entry, in figures
and words, of the amount for remittance to himself, and
(b) in the lower left-hand –corner- his own name and full address.
(2) In addition to postage, registration fee and insurance fee where leviable, the
sender of a postal article intended to be transmitted by post as a value-payable postal
article shall be required to pay an additional fee calculated according to the schedule
given below on the amount specified for recovery from the addressee.
SCHEDULE OF FEES
Amount specified for recovery Not exceeding Rs. 20 Rs. 2.00
from the addressee
Exceeding Rs. 20 but Rs. 3.00
not exceeding Rs. 50
Exceeding Rs. 50
Rs. 5.00
97. No article shall be accepted at any post office for transmission by post as a value-
payable postal article if it is so small or so covered with writing or sealing-wax on the
address-side, or otherwise made up in such a manner, as to render it impracticable to
affix to the article the official labels prescribed by the Director – General.
Explanation:- This rule shall not apply to an article which has an address-label tied to it,
provided that the label is not so small or so covered with writing on the address-side as
to render it impracticable to affix to that side the official labels prescribed by the
Director-General.
98. The amount to be recovered from the addressee shall be the sum specified by the
sender for remittance to himself plus a commission as prescribed by rule 112 on the
amount specified for remittance to the sender. When the amount due is recovered from

--- Page 75 ---
the addressee, the sum for payment to the sender shall be remitted to him by means of a
money order.
99. (1) If the addressee of a value payable postal article omits to take delivery of it
within the seven days, following the date of its presentation or the date of delivery of an
intimation or its arrival to him or to his accredited agent, or in the case of an article sent
out for delivery through a village postman, the date of return to the post office of the
village postman, after its first presentation or delivery of intimation of its arrival to the
addressee or to his accredited agent, the article shall be returned to the sender on the
eighth day;
Provided that if in the meantime the addressee has applied in writing to the post
office for the detention of the article for a further period not exceeding seven days
beginning with the said eighth day and pays with the application a fee of rupees three
for each day of such further period in the case of value payable parcels and rupees two
for each day of such further period in the case of other value payable articles, the article
shall not be returned to the sender until the expiration of the further period covered by
the application . Any fee so paid shall in no circumstances be returned.
Vide GSR 23 (E) dated 11th January 2002
(2) When a value-payable postal article is returned to the sender under sub-rule (1) the
sender shall be required to pay any charges that may be due to it and acknowledge
receipt of the article by signing the form presented by the postman. In no
circumstances shall any fee or fees prepaid by the sender be returned.
100. If a complaint is made by the addressee immediately after the receipt of value-
payable postal article, that it was sent dishonestly, or fraudulently, the Postmaster
General may, if satisfied that there are prima facie grounds for believing that the value-
payable postal article was sent with the intention of defrauding the addressee, with
hold the payment to the sender of the money recovered from the addressee. If after
making such enquiries as may be necessary, he is fully satisfied that that value-payable
postal article was sent with this intention, he may order the return of the article to the
sender and refund to the addressee the sum of money recovered from him on delivery
of the value-payable postal article.

--- Page 76 ---
101. Whenever the sender or addressee of a value-payable postal article makes a
complaint regarding the delivery of or payment from the value-payable postal article,
he shall be entitled to have an enquiry made by the Post Office on paying a fee of rupee
one. The fee shall be paid by means of a postage stamp or stamps affixed to the letter of
complaint. This fee shall be refunded in cases where the complaint is found to be well
grounded.
Vide GSR 23 (E) dated 11th January 2002
Explanation:- Impressions of a stamping machine made by a competent authority shall
be tantamount to affixing stamps of corresponding value.
102. The Central Government shall not incur any liability in respect of the sum
specified for remittance to the sender in respect of a value-payable postal article unless
and until that sum has been received from the addressee and unless a claim for that
sum has been preferred within six months from the date of posting of the article.
“IA-ELECTRONIC VLAUE PAYABLE POST”
102 A. Registered parcels, insured parcels, registered letters, insured letters, registered
book packets, registered book packets containing periodicals, registered book packets
containing printed books, newspapers prepaid with postage at newspaper rate of
postage and with registration fee, express parcels, insured express parcels, may be
transmitted by the inland post as electronic value payable postal articles:-
Provided that the amount specified for remittance to the sender in the case of any
such postal article shall not exceed five thousand rupees and shall not include a fraction
of a rupee and that such articles do not contain coupons, tickets certificates or
introductions designed for the sale of goods on what is known as the “Snowball
System”.
102 B At any post office notified from time to time in this behalf by the Director General
Posts, the sender shall be required to declare that the article is the one the transmission
of which by post as an electronic value payable postal article is permitted.
102 C An article may be sent by the electronic value payable post even though it
possesses no intrinsic value. Thus legal documents, Bonds, policies of insurance,
promissory notes, railway goods, and parcel receipts, bills of lading or ordinary bills for
collection may be sent as electronic Value Payable Postal articles. In the case of railway
receipt or bill of lading sent as an electronic Value Payable postal article it will be
sufficient for the purpose this rule if the article to which railway receipt or bill of lading

--- Page 77 ---
relates has been sent in execution of bonafide order. In the case of other documents
specified document must be sent in education of a bonafide order to send the document
itself.
102 D. The Post offices having the facility of e-payment may book electronic Value
Payable Postal articles deliverable at any post office.
102 E (1) Every postal article intended to be transmitted by post as an electronic Value
Payable article shall be presented at the post office. The senders of the article intended
to be transmitted by post shall write clearly on the face of the article itself -
(a) In the upper left hand corner – the letters “e-VP” followed by an entry, in figure
and words of the amount of remittance to himself, and
(b) In the lower left hand corner his own name and full address.
(2) There should not be any cutting, over writing erasing in the amount of
remittance written on the article.
(3) In addition to postage, registration fee, insurance fee where leviable, the sender
of the postal article intended to be transmitted by post as an electronic Value
Payable Postal article shall be required to pay an additional fee of rupees fifteen per
article which will not be refundable in any case.
102 F The amount to be recovered from the addresses shall be the sum specified by
the sender for remittance to him. When the amount is recovered from addressee,
the sum for payment shall be remitted to him through office of booking by means
of e-payment.
102 G. The provisions of rules 97, 99, 100, 101 and 102 shall so far as may, apply in
relation to electronic Value Payable Postal articles as they apply to Value Payable
Postal articles.
102 H. Electronic Value Payable letters, electronic value payable Parcels and
Express Parcels may be insured. The provisions of rules 72 to 83 shall, so far as may,
apply in relation to electronic Value Payable letter, electronic Value Payable Parcels
and Value Payable Express Parcels as they apply to insured postal articles to which
these rules apply.”
Vide G.S.R 37 (E)dated 18th January 2011
II. FOREIGN POSTAL ARTICLES

--- Page 78 ---
103. Value-payable postal articles may be exchanged under the system known as “V.P.”
or “C.O.D”, notified by the Director General from time to time, in the Post Office Guide.
The general features of the two systems shall be as indicated in rules 104 to 108 and the
individual features of the V.P and C.O.D systems shall be as in rule 109 and in rule 109-
A respectively.
A. GENERAL FEATURES OF V.P AND C.O.D SYSTEM.
104. Value-payable or Cash –on-delivery postal articles may be transmitted abroad,
provided that the amount specified for remittance to the sender in respect of any such
postal article shall not exceed Rs. 600 or such smaller amounts as may, in the case of
Value-payable or Cash-on-delivery articles to any particular country or countries, be
specifically notified by the Director General from time to time, and shall not contain a
fraction of paisa and provided that such articles do not contain coupons, tickets,
certificates or introductions designed for the sale of goods on what is known as
“Snowball system”.
105. No postal article shall be accepted at any post office for transmission by post as
Value-payable postal article unless the sender declares that it is sent in execution of a
bona fide order received by him. At any post office notified from time to time in this
behalf by the Director General, the sender shall, in addition, be required to declare that
the article is one the transmission of which by post as a Value-payable postal article is
permitted. No value-payable article shall be accepted at these offices without such
further declaration.
Explanation: - An article may be sent by the value-payable post even though it
possesses no intrinsic value. Thus, legal documents, bonds, policies of insurance,
promissory notes, railway goods and parcel receipts, bills of lading or ordinary bills for
collection may be sent as value-payable postal articles. In the case of railway receipt or
bill of lading sent as value-payable postal article, it will be sufficient for the purposes of
this rule, if the article to which the railway receipt or bill of lading relates has been sent
in execution of a bona fide order. In the case of the other documents specified, the
document must be sent in execution of a bona fide order to send the document itself.
106. Every postal article intended to be transmitted by post as value-payable postal
article shall be presented at the post office with a printed form, prescribed by the
Director General and obtainable at the post office, in which the sender shall specify the
sum to be remitted to himself, fill in the required entries in ink and sign the declaration
required by rule 105.

--- Page 79 ---
107. (1) If the addressee of a foreign value-payable parcel fails to take delivery of it
within seven days following the date of its first presentation or the date of delivery to
him or to his accredited agent of an intimation of its arrival, a warehousing charge at
the rate of rupee one per day commencing from the eighth day shall be collected
from the addressee at the time of delivery.
Provide that in the case of such a parcel bearing an alternative address, if the parcel
cannot be delivered at the original address, the warehousing charge due from the
first addressee shall be collected from the second addressee at the time of delivery.
(2) If the addressee of a foreign value-payable parcel addressed “Poste Restante:
fails to take delivery of it within seven days following the date of its arrival in the
office of delivery, a warehousing charge at the rate specified in sub-rule (1) shall be
collected from the addressee at the time of delivery.
Provided that the charge shall in no case exceed rupees twenty-four and fifty
paise.
107-A (1) If the addressee of an inward foreign value-payable packet (or bag) of
printed papers fails to take delivery of it within seven days following the date of its
first presentation or the date delivery to him or to his accredited agent of an
intimation of its arrival, and if it weighs more than 500 grams, a warehousing charge
at the rate of rupee one per day, commencing from the eight day, shall be collected
from the addressee at the time of delivery.
(2) If the addressee of (a) an inward foreign value-payable packet (or bag) of printed
papers or business papers, or (b) an inward foreign value-payable insured letter
addressed “Poste Restante” fails to take delivery of it within seven days following the
date of its arrival in the office of delivery, and if it weighs more than 500 grams, a
warehousing charge at the rate of rupee one per day commencing on the eighth day
shall be collected from the addressee at the time of delivery.
108. Rules 97, 101 and 102 relating to inland value-payable articles, shall be equally
applicable to foreign value-payable articles.

--- Page 80 ---
B. INDIVIDUAL FEATURES OF V.P SYSTEM.
109. (1) The sender of a postal article intended to be transmitted by post as value-payable
article shall write clearly on the face of the article itself-
(a) in the upper left-hand corner, the letters “V.P.” followed by an entry, in figures and
words, of the amount for remittance to himself, and
(b) in the lower left-hand corner his own name and full address.
(2) In the case of an article intended for transmission to any country mentioned in
sub-rule (1) above as value-payable, a posting fee of 15 paise shall be prepaid by the
sender;
Provided that in the case of value-payable letters and packets intended for
transmission to the People’s Democratic Republic of Yemen the posting fee shall be
payable at the rate applicable to inland value-payable articles.
(3) In the case of articles received under the V.P System for delivery in India, the
amount to be recovered from the addressee shall be sum specified by the sender for
remittance to himself plus a fee calculated in the manner indicated below:-
(a) in the case of articles received from the People’s Republic of Yemen, a fee as in rule
98;
(b) in the case of articles received from the countries and places with which the medium
of exchange is British Pound Sterling, a fee as in Schedule II below; and
(c) in the case of articles received from the countries and places with which the
medium of exchange is Indian Rupee, a fee as in Schedule 1 below.
A delivery fee of 25 paise on every article transmitted from any country
mentioned in sub-rule (1) other than Pakistan and the People’s /democratic
Republic of Yemen as value-payable shall also be recovered from the addressee.
When the amount due is recovered from the addressee, the sum for payment to the
sender shall be remitted to him by means of money order. If the addressee of a value
payable article refuses to take delivery or omits to take delivery of it, it shall be
returned to the sender.

--- Page 81 ---
SCHEDULE OF FEES
SCHEDULE 1
Amount specified for Not exceeding Rs. 10 ……20 paise
remittance to the Exceeding Rs. 10 but
sender. not exceeding Rs. 25. ……40 paise
Exceeding Rs. 25 ……40 paise for each,
complete sum of Rs. 25
& 40 paise for the
remainder provided
that the remainder does
not exceed Rs. 10 the
charge for it shall be
only 20 paise.
SCHEDULE II
On any sum not exceeding 1 25 paise
For every additional sum of 1 or fraction thereof 20 paise
Note:- The conversion into Indian currency of the amount specified for remittance to the
sender of a value – payable parcel posted in Iraq shall be effected at the rate of exchange
for the issue of foreign sterling money orders in force on the date of receipt of the parcel
in India.
(4) If a complaint is made by the addressee immediately after the receipt of the value
payable postal article that it was sent dishonestly or fraudulently, the Postmaster
General may, if satisfied, that there are prima facie grounds for believing that the value
payable was sent dishonestly or with the intention of defrauding the addressee, with
hold the payment of the sender of money recovered from the addressee. If after making
such enquiries, as may be necessary, he is fully satisfied that the value payable postal
article was sent dishonestly or with fraudulent intention, he may order the return of
article to the sender and refund to the addressee the sum of money recovered from him
on delivery of value payable postal article.
C. INDIVIDUAL FEATURES OF THE C.O.D SYSTEM.

--- Page 82 ---
109-A. (1) Sub-rule (1) of rule 109 shall apply to value payable parcels sent under
the C.O.D system with the exception that the sender shall write on the upper left
hand corner of the parcel the word “Reimbursement” instead of the letters “V.P.”
(2) In the case of a value payable postal parcel posted in India under the C.O.D
system, posting fee of 15 paise and a fee on the amount specified for remittance to
the sender calculated according to Schedule 1 below rule 109 (3) shall be prepaid by
the sender.
(3) The amount to be recovered from the addressee of a foreign value payable
parcel received under the C.O.D system in India for delivery shall be the sum
specified by the sender for remittance to himself plus a delivery fee of 25 paise.
When the amount due is recovered from the addressee, the sum for payment to the
sender shall be remitted to him by means of money order.
(4) In the event of non-delivery of a parcel originating in India for delivery in a
foreign country, the fees prepaid by the sender on the amount specified for
remittance to himself under sub-rule (2) shall on application , be repaid to him
subject to the following deductions:-
(a) 10 per cent of the fee paid with a minimum of 25 paise; and
(b) a fixed charge of 12 paise.
NOTE:- Note below rule 109(3) shall apply to the conversion into Indian currency
of the foreign currency amount in respect of value-payable parcels posted abroad
under cash-on-delivery system.
PART VI- MONEY ORDERS
I. INLAND MONEY ORDERS
ORDINARY INLAND MONEY ORDERS
110. The amount for which a single money order may be issued shall not exceed
Rs.5, 000 and shall not include a fraction of a rupee;
Provided that the amount for which a single money order under National
Social Assistance Programme can be issued shall not exceed Rs. 10,000/-:
Provided further that a money order transmitted through electronic data
communication process may be issued for an amount not exceeding rupees one
crore.

--- Page 83 ---
‘ Provided also that, money order not exceeding Rs. 5000 transmitted
electronically, that is to say by an ‘eMO, shall for all practical purposes be
understood or treated as on ordinary money order.’
Vide GSR 864 (E) dated 18th December 2008
111. Deleted.
112. A commission on the issue of inland money orders shall be charged at the
rate of rupee one for every twenty rupees of the amount of remittance or fraction
thereof. Provided that the amount of commission payable on a Family Allotment
Money Order booked by an Army Record Office, shall be calculated at six per
cent of the total amount of the Family Allotment Money Orders booked, and in
making such calculations, the commission shall be in multiples of ten paise, any
amount less than ten paise shall be regarded as ten paise.
NOTE:-For remittance through Electronic Data Communication Process above Rs.
5,000, the following rates shall apply:
Commission
Rs. 5,000 to Rs. 1 lakh Rs. 200/-
Rs. 1,00,001 to Rs. 2 lakh Rs.400/-
Rs. 2,00,001 to Rs. 3 lakh Rs. 600/-
Rs. 3,00,001 to Rs. 4 lakh Rs. 800/-
Rs. 4,00,001 to Rs. 10 lakh Rs. 1,000/-
Rs. 10,00,001 to Rs. 20 lakh Minimum Rs. 1,000 plus Rs. 25/-
for every additional 1 lakh
Rs. 20,00,001 to Rs. 50 lakh Rs. 2,000/-
Rs. 50,00,001 to Rs. 70 lakh Rs. 2,500/-
Rs. 70,00,001 to Rs. 10 0lakh Rs. 3,000/-
113. The Director General may, at any time, (a) suspend the issue of money
orders upon or by any particular post office, or group of post offices, or (b) direct

--- Page 84 ---
that money orders shall not be so issued except on payment of special rates of
commission higher than those prescribed by rule 112.
114.The remitter of a money order or eMO shall fill in blue or black ink on the
money order form or as the case may be, on the eMO Form, prescribed and
supplied by the Director General, such particulars as the Director General may
require. Such particulars may be written in English or Hindi or in the regional
language of the area in which the money order or the eMO is remitted.’
Vide GSR 864 (E) dated 18th December 2008
115. (1) The money order form duly filled in, together with the amount of the
money order and the commission payable may be presented at the post office
during the hours prescribed for money order business.
(2) In case of eMO booked under ‘One to Many’, filling up of individual eMO
Form shall not be required and list duly prepared and authenticated by the
remitter, accompanied by softcopy “(electronic form)”shall be treated as eMO
Form. The remitter shall present the hardcopy”(paper form)” of the list to the
Post Office in duplicate in case of Head Offices and in triplicate in case of Sub
Post Offices indicating serial number, complete name and address of the payee,
office of payment with PIN Code , amount of eMO and Commission.
Vide GSR 864 (E) dated 18th December 2008
116. A receipt shall be given to the remitter for the amount paid by him on
account of the money order and the commission.
117.(1)The remitter of a money order shall be entitled to obtain free of charge, an
acknowledgement of the payment of the amount of the order signed by the payee
or as the case may be, his authorized agent or in the event of the loss of such
acknowledgement during transmission by post a certificate of payment in the
form prescribed by the Director General.
(2) The acknowledgement along with the voucher shall be kept in the Head
Offices of office of payment and shall be sent to the office of issue on demand. If
the remitter requests for an acknowledgement, the office of issue shall send a
written communication to the office of payment for the same and thereafter office
of payment shall send the acknowledgment to the remitter by post:

--- Page 85 ---
Provided that a certificate of payment shall be issued by the office of issue
on the request of the remitter.
Vide GSR 864 (E) dated 18th December 2008
118. The payment of a money order shall ordinarily be made at the address of the
payee:-
(i)To the payee himself, where it has been so indicated by the remitter on the
money order form,
(ii) in any other case, to the payee or to any person authorized in writing by the
payee in this behalf.
119. (1) The money order and acknowledgement shall be signed by the payee
named by the remitter or by some person authorized in writing by the payee in
this behalf. The signature shall be written in ink in the space provided for the
purpose.
(1-A). In case of eMOs payable in bulk to a single payee; the printing of
individual eMOs shall not be required for getting signature of the payee on the
eMO form and its Acknowledgement portion.
Vide GSR 864 (E) dated 18th December 2008
(2) In no case, either the payee or any other person authorized by him shall write
any message or remarks on the acknowledgment part of the money order.
120. If the remitter or payee of a money order is illiterate, his mark shall be
obtained and shall be verified in such manner as the Director – General may
direct.
121. A money order shall be redirected to the payee on his written request free of
charge.
122. The remitter of a money order which has not been paid, may require that the
address of the payee shall be altered or that the name of the post office, at which
the order was originally made payable, shall be changed. The required change
shall be made without additional charge on the remitter’s applying in writing to

--- Page 86 ---
the post office at which the order was issued and producing the receipt and
giving full particulars of the payee’s address as entered in the money order.
123.(1) The remitter of a money order which has not been paid, may require that
the amount be paid to some person other than the payee named in the order. The
required change shall be made, on payment of a second commission calculated in
accordance with rule 112 on the remitter’s applying in writing to the post office at
which the order was issued and producing the receipt and giving full particulars
of the payee’s address as entered in the money order.
(2) The alteration of payee’s name shall not be permitted in the eMO.
Vide GSR 864 (E) dated 18th December 2008
124. The remitter of a money order which has not been paid, may stop payment
and requires that the money be repaid to himself. This shall be done without
additional charge on the remitter’s applying in writing to the post office at which
the money order was issued, and producing the receipt and giving full particulars
of the payee’s address as entered in the money order. In no case, however, shall
the Post Office be responsible for inability or failure to stop payment of a money
order in compliance with the remitter’s request.
125. If the payee of a money order refuses to take payment on presentation of the
money order to him, the amount of the money order shall be returned at once to
the remitter, free of charge;
Provided that if the payee while refusing to take payment on presentation of the
money order to him, makes an application in writing to the post office of delivery
for the detention of the money order or if the payee is not found at the address
given on the money order the money order shall be detained in the post office for a
period not exceeding seven days from the date of its presentation to the payee or
from the date it is sent out for payment, as the case may be, if the payee fails to
take payment of the money order from the post office within the said period of
seven days, the money order shall be returned to the remitter on the first working
day immediately following the expiry of the said period of seven days.
Provided further that the commission shall in no case be refunded.
126. If payment of a money order to the payee cannot be effected and the amount
cannot be repaid to the remitter owing to the latter not being found, the order shall
be void and its value credited to the Central Government. But, if the payee or

--- Page 87 ---
remitter subsequently applies for payment, the amount of the order shall be paid
to him on the authority of the Audit Officer, provided that application is made
before the expiration of one year from the date of issue of the original order.
Provided that the amount of a money order other than a V.P. money order the
payee, is dead, the amount of the money order or money orders up to one hundred
rupees shall be paid to the claimant on his executing a personal indemnity bond;
and for amounts exceeding one hundred rupees, an indemnity bond with one
surety be obtained from the claimant.
Exception .- In the case of money orders issued from field post offices, and family
allotment money orders remitted on behalf of seamen working on Indian
merchant ships the limit of time for making application shall be two years.
126-A. Omitted.
Telegraphic Inland Money Orders.
127. The amount for which a single telegraphic money order may be issued shall not
exceed R. 2,000 and shall not include a fraction of a rupee.
128. A fee for the issue of a telegraphic money order shall be charged at the rate of
commission on an ordinary inland money order for the same amount added to a
telegraph charge calculated at the rates for inland telegrams for the number of
chargeable words used in the telegram advising the remittance, according as the
telegram is to be sent as an “Express” or as an “Ordinary” message. In addition to these
charges, a supplementary fee at the rate of rupees three for each telegraph money order
issued up to Rs. 50 and at the rate of rupees five for each telegraph money order issued
exceeding Rs. 50 but not exceeding Rs. 200 and at the rate of rupees eight for each
telegraphic money order issued exceeding Rs. 200 shall be charged. The remitter of a
telegraphic money order may have a private communication added to the telegram
advising the remittance on paying for the additional words in excess of ten at the rate in
force for the time being for inland telegrams of the class to which the advice belongs.
GSR 59 (E) dated 11th February, 1982 Vide GSR 23 (E) dated 11th January 2002
Provided that a telegraphic money order, Express or Ordinary, for a sum no
exceeding two hundred and fifty rupees shall not be accepted for payment on Sundays
through a post office kept open on such days for delivery of “Express Delivery Articles”
unless an additional supplementary fee of one rupee is paid on such money order.

--- Page 88 ---
129. The Director General may, at any time, (a) suspend the issue of telegraphic money
orders upon any post office, or group of post offices, or (b) direct that telegraphic
money orders shall not be so issued except on payment of special fees higher than those
prescribed by rule 128.
130. The remitter of a telegraphic money order shall fill in ink on the money order form
prescribed and supplied by the Director General, such particulars as the Director
General may require.
131. The money order form duly filled in, together with the amount to be remitted and
the fees for the telegraphic money order and private communication (if any), may be
presented at the post office during the hours prescribed for telegraphic money order
business.
132. A receipt shall be given to the remitter, showing the total amount paid by him, the
payee’s name and the hour at which the telegraphic money order was presented.
133. The remitter of a telegraphic money order shall be entitled to obtain free of charge,
by post, an acknowledgement of the payment of the amount of the order signed by the
payee.
134. The payment of a telegraphic money order shall ordinarily be made as soon as
practicable after the receipt of the telegraphic advice by the office of payment, at the
residence of the payee on his signing a rece4ipt for the amount paid and the
acknowledgement.
Provided that telegraphic money orders amounting to more than Rs. 600 in one
day shall not be paid to any person who is not either permanently resident within the
jurisdiction of the office of payment or personally known to the postmaster-in-charge of
such office until confirmation of the telegraphic advice has been received by post,
unless in the meantime the payee can get a respectable local resident to stand surety for
him by executing an indemnity bond for the amount of such orders in the form
prescribed by the director General.
135. The receipt and acknowledgement shall be signed by the payee named by the
remitter, or by some person authorized in writing by the payee in this behalf. The
signature shall be written in ink in the space provided for the purpose.
136. If the remitter or payee of telegraphic money order is illiterate, his mark shall be
obtained and shall be verified in such manner as the Director General may direct.

--- Page 89 ---
137. A telegraphic money order shall be re-directed to the payee by post free of charge
on his written request.
138. The remitter of a telegraphic money order which has not been paid may require
that the address of the payee shall be altered or that the name of the office at which the
order was originally made payable, shall be changed. The required alteration shall be
made in the ordinary course of post, without additional charge, on the remitter’s
applying in writing to the post office at which the money order was issued.
139. The remitter of a telegraphic money order which has not been paid may require
that the amount be paid to some person other than the payee named in the order. The
required change shall be made in the ordinary course of post, on payment of the
commission chargeable in accordance with rule 112 on an ordinary money order for the
same amount, on the remitter’s applying in writing to the post office at which the order
was issued, and presenting the receipt granted for the original order.
140. The remitter of a telegraphic money order which has not been paid, may stop
payment and require that the money be repaid to himself. This shall be done on the
remitter’s applying in writing to the post office at which the money order was issued,
producing the receipt and giving full particulars of the payee’s address as entered in the
money order. Payment may be stopped by telegram, the remitter paying necessary
charges at the ordinary rates for it. In no case, however, shall the Post Office be
responsible for inability or failure to stop payment of a money order in compliance with
the remitter’s request.
141. If the payee of a telegraphic money order refuses to take payment or cannot be
found, the telegraphic advice shall be returned by post free of any further charge and
the amount of the money order shall be repaid to the remitter. The fees shall not be
refunded.
142. If payment of a telegraphic money order to the payee cannot be effected and the
amount cannot be repaid to the remitter owing to the latter not being found, the order
shall be void and its value credited to the Central Government. But, if the payee or
remitter subsequently applies for payment, the amount of the void order shall be paid
to him on the authority of the Audit Officer, provided that application is made before
the expiration of one year from the date of issue of the original order.

--- Page 90 ---
143. Cancelled.
144. Deleted.
Instant Money Order
144-A. Money can be transferred through the service of Instant Money Order here-in-
after referred to as ‘IMO’, for an amount not less than Rupees one thousand and not
more than Rupees fifty thousand.
Explanation:- For the purpose of this part, ‘IMO’ service means a computerized web-
based instant money transfer service between two resident individuals in the territory
of India through the Post Office.
144 B. The Central Government may specify, by order issued from time to time, the Post
offices from where the ‘IMO’ may be remitted or paid or wherever necessary, suspend
the ‘IMO’ services from the those post offices.
144 C. The central Government may, by order issued from time to time, prescribe the
rates of commission and charges for specialized message, if any, applicable for
remittance of money through ‘IMO’.
144 D. The remittance of money may be made in such manner and in such form as may
be prescribed by the Director General of Posts, from time to time.
144 E. (1) The form duly filled together with the amount of ‘IMO’, the commission and
the charges, if any, payable for personalized message, may be presented at the specified
post office during the hours prescribed for ‘IMO’ transactions.
(2) A receipt thereof shall be given to the remitter along with a confidential ‘IMO’
number in a scaled condition in the space provided in the receipt.
(3) The remitter shall inform the payee at his own means and risk, the confidential
‘IMO’ number.
(4) The payee may present his request for payment of ‘IMO’ along with the confidential
‘IMO’ number in the prescribed form in any specified post office other than the post
office of its booking.

--- Page 91 ---
(5) The Counter Postal Assistant/Supervisor shall arrange for payment of ‘IMO’ to the
payee after verifying the confidential ‘IMO” number, identity of the payee and the
correctness of its actual booking.
144 F. On a request by the remitter in the prescribed form for repayment of ‘IMO’ to
him, the same may be paid, if not already paid to the payee, on production of receipt
issued to him along with the confidential ‘IMO’ number, proof of his identify and full
particulars of the payee.
144 G. If the remitter or payee of the ‘IMO’ is illiterate, his thumb mark shall be
obtained and verified in such a manner as the Director General may direct.
Vide GSR 30(E) dated 20th January, 2006
II.- FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS
ORDINARY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS
145. (1) Foreign money orders shall be of two kinds, namely:-
(a) Money orders expressed in rupee currency; and
(b) Money orders expressed in sterling.
(2) The Director General shall, from time to time, notify in the Post Office guide the
countries and places with which money orders of each kind may be exchanged.
146. (1) The amount for which single foreign rupee money order may be issued or the
total amount for which a single remitter may obtain such money orders in one day,
shall not exceed Rs. 1,000. or such smaller sum as may in the case of remittances to any
particular country or countries be specially notified by the Director General. [Sentence
in draft may be put up here.] In the event of foreign rupee money orders exceeding the
prescribed limit in the aggregate being accepted by any post office or offices in India,
from a single remitter in one day only such money order or money orders as do not
exceed that limit shall be advised to destination and the value of the remaining money
order or money orders shall be repaid to the remitter, who shall not, however be

--- Page 92 ---
granted a refund of the commission paid by him in respect of such money orders. No
foreign rupee money order shall include any fraction of a paisa.
(2) The amount for which a single foreign sterling money order may be issued or the
total amount for which a single remitter may obtain such money order in one day shall
be limited to 40 or such smaller sum as may in the case of remittances to any particular
country or countries be especially notified by the Director General. The total amount for
which a single remitter may obtain such money orders in one day for any country other
than Great Britain and Northern Ireland shall not exceed the prescribed limit. In the
event of foreign sterling money orders exceeding the prescribed limit in aggregate bring
accepted by a post office or offices in India from a single remitter in one day (for
countries other than Great Britain and Northern Ireland) only such money order or
money orders shall as do not exceed that limit shall be advised to destination and the
value of the remaining money order or money orders shall be repaid to the remitter
who shall not however be granted a refund of the commission paid by him in respect of
such money orders. No foreign sterling money orders shall include any fraction of a
penny.
(2A) Where a single foreign rupee money order or a single foreign currency money
order exceeding the limit specified in sub-rule (1) or sub-rule (2) as the case may be is
accepted, the said money order shall be advised to destination only for the limit so
specified and the balance, together with the excess charged commission shall be
refunded to the remitter.
(3) The amount of a foreign sterling money order shall be paid to the post office in
rupee currency at such rates of exchange as the Director General shall, from time to
time, direct.
146-A. The remitter of a foreign money order shall declare the purpose of making the
remittance in such form as may be prescribed by the Director General.
147. (1) In the case of foreign rupee money orders, the rates of commission shall be
following, namely:-
On any sum not exceeding Rs. 10 20 paise.
On any sum exceeding Rs. 10 but
not exceeding Rs. 25 40 paise
On any sum exceeding Rs. 25 40 paise on each complete sum of Rs. 25
and 40 paise for the remainder provided

--- Page 93 ---
that If the remainder does not exceed
rupees 10 the charge for it shall be 20
paise only .
(2) In the case of foreign sterling Money Order the rates of commission shall be the
following; namely:-
On an sum not exceeding L 1 25 paise.
For each additional L 1/- or
fraction thereof in excess of L 1/- 20 paise
Provided that in the case of such money orders to Aden and Pakistan, the rates of
commission shall be the same as those prescribed by Rule 112(1) for Inland Money
Orders.
148. Omitted.
149. (1) The remitter of a foreign rupee money order shall, unless the money order is
one for which an advice of payment as provided for in sub-rule (2) can be had, be
entitled to receive free of charge an acknowledgement of the payment of the order
signed by the payee.
(2) The remitter of a foreign money order to any of the countries or places specially
notified in that behalf by the Director general from time to time in the Post Office Guide
shall be entitled to receive an advice of its payment from the foreign post office of
payment by paying a fee of 20 Paise in addition to the commission chargeable on the
money order.
(3) When the remitter of a foreign money order has not paid the fee for an advice of
payment and desires to have an enquiry made by the Post Office regarding the disposal
of the money order, he shall be entitled to this service on payment of the same fee as
that chargeable for an advice of payment.
150. (1) Rules 122, 123 and 124 relating to inland money orders shall apply mutatis
mutandis to foreign sterling money orders and foreign rupee money orders.
(2) The Post Office of issue, on receipt of an application from the remitter, shall forward
it for disposal to the Indian Post Office of Exchange to which the money order was
originally sent.

--- Page 94 ---
151. Rules 113 (a) , 114, 115, 116 and 120, relating to inland money orders, shall be
applicable to the issue of foreign money orders.
152. Foreign sterling money orders received for payment in India shall be paid as if they
were inland money orders, the amount in sterling of the original money order being
converted into rupee currency by the Indian Post office of exchange
(at Bombay or Madras, as the case may be) at such rate of exchange as the Director
General may, from time to time, direct.
152 A. The payee of a foreign money order received for payment in India shall, on
payment a fee of 20 paise at the time of taking payment of the order or of a fee of 50
paise thereafter, be entitled to obtain a certificate of payment of the money order in such
form as may be prescribed by the Director General.
153. The payment of foreign money order shall ordinarily be made at the address of the
payee. It shall be made on his signing the order and acknowledgement (except when
otherwise provided by the Director General) in the case of a foreign rupee money order
and on his signing order in the case of a foreign sterling money order.
154. Under no circumstances can a foreign money order, whether rupee money order or
a sterling money order, be aid after it has been treated as void or returned to the
country of issue.
155. Rules 119, 120,121 and 125, relating to inland money orders, shall be applicable to
the payment of foreign money orders.
AIR MAIL MONEY ORDERS
156. Air mail money orders may be issued from any post office in India for any country
or place as the Director General shall, from time to time, notify in the Post Office Guide.
The limits of value and other conditions laid down in the foregoing rules relating to
ordinary foreign money orders shall apply in the case of air mail money order;
Provided that the fees for air mail money orders shall be made up of (i) the
money order commission at the rates prescribed by rule 147 and (ii) an air mail charge
at the rate of
10 paise for each money order drawn on Sri Lanka or Pakistan.
40 Paise for each money order drawn on other countries.
TELEGRAPHIC FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS

--- Page 95 ---
157. Rupee and Sterling orders. - Telegraphic foreign money orders shall be of two
kinds, namely:-
(a) Telegraphic money orders expressed in rupees, and
(b) Telegraphic money orders expressed in sterling.
158. Countries of exchange for telegraphic foreign money orders.- The Director General
shall, from time to time, notify in the Post Office Guide the countries and place with
which telegraphic money orders of each kind as specified in rule 157 may be exchanged.
159. Omitted.
160. Offices of Issue.- Telegraphic money order may be issued from any post office in
India which is authorized to issue such orders for the countries and places notified in
the Post Office Guide under rule 158.
161. Maximum amount.- The limit or value and other conditions laid down in rules 146
and 146-A shall apply to telegraphic foreign money orders except that a telegraphic
foreign rupee money order shall not include any sum less than a rupee.
162. Fees. - The fee of a telegraphic foreign money order issued in India shall be made
up of:-
(1) The commission applicable to an ordinary money order for the same amount drawn
on the country or place concerned,
(2) A telegraphic charge calculated on the number of words used in the telegram
advising the remittance at the rate in force for the time being for an ordinary or letter
telegram, as the case may be, for the country or place concerned (or in the case of
payment in Burma, Pakistan and Sri Lanka for an express or ordinary telegram), and
(3) A supplementary charge of 15 paise.
(163) Applicablity of rules regarding issue of order.- Rules 129(a) , 130, 131, 132 and 136
shall apply to telegraphic foreign money orders in the same manner in which they
apply to telegraphic inland money order:
164. Private communication.- The remitter of a telegraphic foreign money order may
have a private communication to the payee added to the telegram advising the
remittance on paying for the additional words at the rate in force for the time being for
an ordinary or deferred telegram, as the case may be, for the country or place
concerned;
Provided that in the case of telegraphic money orders for Burma, Pakistan and
Sri Lanka the remitter may have a private communication to the payee added to the
telegram advising the remittance, on paying for the additional words in excess of the

--- Page 96 ---
prescribed minimum number of words admissible for the country concerned at the rate
in force for the time being for the class of telegram to which the advice belongs.
165. Prepayment of reply:- The remitter of a telegraphic money order for any foreign
country or place notified in the Post Office Guide under rule 158 except Pakistan, Sri
Lanka and the people’s Democratic Republic of Yemen and Burma may prepay the
telegraph charge for a reply.
166. Advice of payment.- (1) The remitter of a telegraphic money order for any foreign
country or place notified in the Post Office Guide under rule 158 except the People’s
Democratic Republic of Yemen, Pakistan and Sri Lanka may obtain an advice of
payment on paying the fee charged for such advice in the case of an ordinary money
order; provided that, if he desires that the request for the advice should be
communicated to the post office of payment by telegraph, a further charge at the rate
for the time being in force for an ordinary or letter telegram, as the case may be, shall be
made for the additional words “advice payment” which shall be added to the
telegraphic message.
(2) Rule 133 relating to telegraphic inland money orders shall apply to telegraphic
money orders for the people’s Democratic Republic of Yemen, Pakistan and Sri Lanka.
167. Alteration of instructions.- (1) The remitter in India of a telegraphic foreign money
order may, on receipt o f information from the office of issue in India that the order has
not been paid, require that the name or address of the payee or both shall be altered or
that the amount shall be repaid to him.
(2) Any such instructions in the case of an order payable in Burma, Pakistan and Sri
Lanka shall be communicated by telegraph to the office of destination in Burma,
Pakistan or Sri Lanka, if the remitter pays the cost of the telegram, and shall otherwise
be sent by post.
(3) In the case of orders payable elsewhere than in Burma, Pakistan and Sri Lanka,
the instructions of the remitter shall be communicated by telegraph to the office of
destination on the remitter’s paying the cost, at the ordinary rate of twelve words for a
private message to the country or place concerned, otherwise by post.
168. Payment in India.- The payment in India of a telegraphic foreign money order shall
ordinarily be made at the address of the payee on his signing a receipt for the amount
paid and as soon as practicable after the receipt of the telegraphic advice.

--- Page 97 ---
169. Redirection:- A telegraphic foreign money order received for payment in India
shall be redirected to the payee by post free of charge to this revised address in India on
his written request or when there is sufficient trustworthy information upon which to
redirect the order.
170. Non-delivery.- (1) If the payee of a telegraphic foreign money order, received for
payment in India cannot be found, or if the payee refuses to take payment, a telegraphic
reference shall be made to the office of issue in order to obtain instructions from the
remitter regarding the disposal of the money order.
(2) If a telegraphic money order is ultimately undeliverable or if the remitter desires
repayment, the money order shall be reissued by post to the remitter without further
charge.
171. Applicability of rules regarding payment.- (1) Rules 135 and 136 shall apply to the
payment in India of telegraphic foreign money orders in the same manner in which
they apply to the payment of telegraphic inland money orders,
(2) Rule 152 shall also apply to the payment of telegraphic foreign currency money
orders received from countries mentioned in the Post Office Guide under rule 158.
172. Telegraphing of foreign money order to Indian Office of exchange .- (1) The
remitter of a foreign money order drawn on any country to which money orders can be
sent other than those to which telegraphic money orders can be sent, may have the
particulars of the money order, telegraphed to the Indian office of exchange concerned ,
and that office shall, on receipt of the telegraphic advice, issue by post a money order
on the country of payment under the rules relating to foreign money order.
(2) Rule 161 shall apply to money orders so telegraphed.
173. Fee for issue of order under rule 172.- The fee for the issue of a foreign money order
telegraphed under rule 172 shall be made up of:-
(1) the rate of commission on a foreign money order for the same amount,
(2) a telegraph charge calculated at the ordinary or express rate, as the case may be, for
inland telegrams for the actual number of words used in the telegram advising the
remittance.
(3) a supplementary charge of rupee two.
Vide GSR 23 (E) dated 11th January 2002

--- Page 98 ---
174. Applicability of rules to orders under rule 172, Rules 129 (a), 130, 131, 132,136. 138,
139 and 140 shall apply in the case of foreign money orders telegraphed under rule 172
except that the remitter shall not be entitled to have a private communication added to
the telegram advising the remittance.
175. Deleted.
176. Deleted.
177. Deleted.
178. Deleted.
179. Deleted.
180. Deleted.
III.INDIAN POSTAL ORDERS
180-A. The amount for which a single Indian Postal Order may be issued shall be Rs. 1. ,
Rs. 2, Rs. 5, Rs. 7, Rs. 10, Rs. 20, Rs. 50, and Rs. 100. Commission charged shall be as
follows:-
Value Commission
Up to Rs. 10 Rs. 1/-
Upto Rs. 20 Rs. 2/-
Upto Rs. 50 Rs. 5/-
Upto Rs. 100 Rs. 10/-
Provided that the amount for which a single Indian Postal Order (for this
purpose hereinafter called as Field Postal Order) may be issued shall be Rs. 2,000, Rs.
3,000, Rs. 5,000, Rs. 10,000, Rs. 15,000 and Rs. 20,000. Commission charged on a Field
Postal Order shall be as follows:-
Denomination Commission
2,000 Rs. 30.00
3,000 Rs. 30.00

--- Page 99 ---
5,000 Rs. 50.00
10,000 Rs. 60.00
15,000 Rs. 80.00
20,000 Rs. 90.00
Such Field Postal Order shall be sold to Armed Forces Personnel only at Field Post
Offices under Indian Army Postal Service.
180-B . Broken amounts may be made up by affixing unused Indian Postal Stamps, not
exceeding four in number on the face of the Indian Postal Orders or where the space on
that side is not adequate on the reverse thereof; provided that the total of stamps affixed
on each order shall not exceed three rupees and the total amount payable on the order
shall not exceed one hundred rupees.
180-C. The Director-General may prescribe the offices authorized to hold a stock of
Indian Postal orders and the manner in which they shall be solo and paid to the public.
180-D. (1) Indian Postal Orders presented within 24 months from the last day of the
month of issue are encashable without second commission. If an Indian Postal Order is
not presented for payment within 24 months from the last day of the month of issue, the
2nd commission @ prescribed in Rule 180-A above, shall be charged, which shall be paid
in postage stamp affixed to the back of the order. The Indian Postal Orders presented
more than 36 months after the last day of the month of issue shall be time barred and
shall not be paid.
(2) (i) Field Postal Order presented within four months from the last day of the month
of issue are encashable without second commission. If a field Postal Order is not
presented for payment within four months from the last day of the month of issue, a
second commission equal to the first commission shall be charged, which shall be paid
in postage stamps affixed to the back of the order.
(ii) field Postal Orders presented for payment more than six months after the last day of
the month of issue will not be paid but will be forfeited.
Vide GSR 408 (E). Dated 17th May, 2010

--- Page 100 ---
180-E (1) The purchaser of an Indian Postal order shall be entitled to obtain repayment
of its value, but not the commission , on presenting the order and the counterfoil at the
post office from which the order was purchased within two years from the last day of
the month of issue. He shall also be entitled to repayment of its value after two years
but not after three years from the last day of the month of issue provided a second
commission at the rates prescribed in rule 180-A above is paid.
(2) Should the order have been crossed for payment through a bank, the purchaser shall
first cancel the crossing by writing across the face of the order the words “please pay
cash” and adding his initials.
(3) No payment shall be claimable in respect of any stamp used for the purpose of
making up a broken amount unless it is a proper stamp within the meaning of rule 191.
180-F After an Indian Postal order has once been paid to whomsoever it is paid, the Post
Office shall not be liable for any further claim.
PART VII- OFFICIAL POSTAL ARTICLES
I. INLAND OFFICIAL POSTAL ARTICLES
181. (1) Official postal articles shall be transmitted post under the following
conditions:-
(a) The rates of postage and conditions of transmission by post hereinbefore
prescribed for the different classes of unofficial postal articles and the rules under
which such articles may be registered, insured, or sent value-payable shall be
applicable also to official postal articles of the same classes.
Exception 1 .- The condition that postage shall be prepaid in full on post card does not
apply “Service Unpaid” post cards in the cases mentioned in rules 182 and 186 (2).
Exception 2. - The Conditions that unpaid letters must be securely closed by the senders
shall not apply to letters sent unpaid under the provisions of rules 182 and 186.
Exception 3. - The condition that a parcel shall not contain more than one written
communication of the nature of a letter, or having the character of a personal
communication, shall not apply to official parcels which contain office files provided
that no one file shall contain more than one communication of such nature or having
such character which was not contained therein when the file was received in the office
from which it is being dispatched.

--- Page 101 ---
Exception 4:- Postal articles of any class sent on the service of the Indian Posts and
Telegraphs Department by officers of the Department, Posts and Telegraphs Audit
Officers and such other officers as may be authorized by the Director General in this
behalf, shall be transmitted free of postage and all other postal fees or charges.
(b) Official postal articles, whether the postage is prepaid or not, shall be the
superscription “On India Government Service” when posted by Government officials
authorized to use service postage stamps or ‘On Service’ when posted by all others
authorized to use service postage stamps. This superscription shall be supported by the
signature and official designation to be entered in the lower left hand corner of the
article of the officer who sends the article or of the Head Clerk or Superintendent of his
office or other responsible officer to whom the duty of dispatching is assigned.
Explanation 1.- Service post cards bear the inscription “On service” printed
immediately above the impressed stamp. In their case, therefore no further
superscription shall be required.
Explanation 2.- Postmasters may recognize abbreviated designations provided they
are generally known, but no official can claim the recognition of an abbreviation, the
rule being that the designation shall be entered in full.
Explanation 3:- Postmasters may recognize facsimile impressions of signatures made
by means of stamps, but not such impressions when lithographed or otherwise
produced. Public officers who use such stamps shall make arrangements for their
proper custody and use; and where there is any reason to suspect the misuse of any
such stamp or the absence of proper precaution against its misuse, postmaster may
decline to recognize the stamp impression and require strict adherence to the rule.
Printed names shall not be recognized in lieu of signatures except in the case of official
Gazettes in open covers posted in large numbers by the office of publication.
(c) Service stamps affixed to, or impressions of stamping machines taken on, an article
which does not bear the prescribed superscriptions supported by the signature and
official designation of the sender shall not be recognized by the Post Office in payment
of Postage.
(c) The delivery and redirection of articles super scribed “On India Government
Service” or “On Service “shall be governed by the official designation (when given) of
the addressee.

--- Page 102 ---
(2) Envelopes bearing the inscription “Official Paid” printed at the top right hand
corner of postal articles in lieu of postage stamps shall also be considered as official
postal articles and shall, subject to the provisions of the Note (2) to Rule 190 be eligible
for transmission by post under the conditions prescribed in sub-rule (1) of this rule.
These envelopes shall, for the present, be used by Military Headquarters. Formations
and Units only. The use of such envelopes shall be confined exclusively to ordinary
official letters of the inland post. These shall not be valid for use for registered or
insured letters or for parcels or for postal articles of any other category. These envelopes
also shall not be sold at any post office.
182. (1) The postage chargeable on the delivery of official postal articles when the
postage is not prepaid or is insufficiently prepaid, shall be the same as payable on
unofficial postal articles of the same category.
Exception:- the above clause shall not be applicable in respect of postal articles posted
by or received by the Election Commission containing ballot paper. For such mail single
deficiency will be collected.
NOTE.- The prepayment of postage on parcels is compulsory.
183. The following persons shall be entitled to use service postage stamps on officials
postal articles sent by them subject to the conditions noted against each:-
(a) All Government officials, except those who are on leave or have retired from the
service, provided that the articles posted by them are bona fide and exclusively on
service of the Government of India.
(b) The Vice Chancellors and Registrars of the Universities of Agra, Andhra,
Allahabad, Bombay, Calcutta, Delhi, Gauhati, Jammu and Kashmir, Karnataka,
Lucknow, Madras, Mysore, Nagpur, North Bengal, Punjab, Patna, Poona, Rajasthan,
Roorkee, Saugar, Travancore and of the Annamalai University at Annamalainagar,
Banaras Hindu University, the Maharaja Sayajirao University of Baroda. Muslim
University Aligarh, Osmania University, Visva Bharati, Shri Venkateshwara Universtity
at Tirupati, Shrimati Nathibai Damodardas Thackersey Women’s University at Bombay,
Gujarat University, Utkal University at Cuttack, Bihar University and Sardar Vallabh
bhai Vidyapeeth, provided that the articles posted by them relate solely to the public
business of the said Universities.

--- Page 103 ---
(c) The Presidents of the Districts Educational Councils in the State of Madras and
their Secretaries, provided that the articles posted by them relate solely to the public
business of the Council.
(d) The Astronomer in-charge of the G.V. Juggarao observatory. Vizagapatam,
provided that the articles posted by them relate solely to business of the Observatory.
(e) The Chairman of the Board of Trustees for the Hospital for Mental Diseases at
Ranchi and the Superintendent of the said Hospital, provided that the articles posted by
them relate solely to the business of the Hospital.
(f) The Secretary of the Indian Central Cotton Committee and Officer-in-charge of
the various research and other schemes conducted from funds placed at their disposal
by the Indian Central Cotton Committee, provided that the articles posted by them
relate solely to the business of the Committee.
(g) The Commissioner of Waqfs in the Muzaffarnagar District of the Uttar Pradesh
and Commissioner of Waqfs, West Bengal, provided that the articles posted by them
relate to matter connected with their official duties.
(h) The President-Secretary of the Assam Sanskrit Board, provided that the articles
posted by him relate solely to the business of the Board.
(i) The Secretaries of Bombay and Bengal Boards of Film Censors, provided that the
articles posted by them relate solely to the business of the Boards.
(j) The Director of Agriculture in the State of Bombay and Officer-in-charge of the
various research and other schemes conducted under the supervision of the Director of
Agriculture from funds placed at his disposal by the Trustees of the Sir Sasoon David
Trust Fund, provided that the articles posted by them relate solely to the public
business of the schemes, and also the Chairman of the Board of the Sir Sasoon David
Trust Fund, Bombay, provided that the articles posted by him relate solely to the
business of the Board.
(k) The Chairman , Bar Council, Madras, provided that the articles posted by him
relate solely to the public business of the Council.
(l) The Executive Officer, Port Haj Committee, Calcutta, and the Secretary, Port Haj
Committee, Bombay, provided that the articles posted by them relate solely to the
business of the Committee.

--- Page 104 ---
(m) The Secretary, Indian Council of Agricultural Research, provided that the articles
posted by him relate solely to the business of the Council.
(n) The Deputy Collector of Salt Revenue, Bombay, provided that the articles posted
by them relate solely to the business of the Landing and Wharfage Fees Fund.
(o) The Controller of Emigrant Labour, provided that the articles posted by them
relate solely to the business as Controller.
(p) The Backward Class Officer, Bombay State, provided that the articles posted by
them relate solely to the business of the Criminal Tribes Industrial Societies.
(q) The Secretary of the Indian Central Jute Committee provided that the articles
posted by him relate solely to the business of the Committee.
(r) The Secretary, Medical Council of India, provided that the articles posted by him
relate solely to the business of the Council.
(s) The Chairman and the Secretary of the Coal Board, provided that the articles
posted by them relate solely to the business of the Board.
(t) The Director and the Secretary of the Council of Scientific and Industrial
Research, provided that the articles posted by them relate solely to the business of the
Council.
(u) The Secretaries of India State and District Sailors, Soldiers and Airmen’s Boards
in India provided that the articles posted by them relate solely to the business of the
Boards.
(v) The Chairman and the Secretary of the Coffee Board, the Chief Coffee Marketing
Officer and Director of Propaganda, the Deputy Chief Coffee Marketing Officer,
Officers-in-charge of the various Sub-officers of the Board, the Director of Research,
Superintendent, Coffee Research Sub-Station, the Senior Liason Officers and Junior
Liaison Officers of the Research Department provided that the articles posted by them
relate solely to the business of the Board.
(w) Omitted.
(w1) The Chairman and Secretary of the Saurashtra, West Bengal, Madras, Kerala,
Punjab, Haryana, Bombay, Bihar, Assam, Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan
and Uttar Pradesh State Electricity Boards and Officers-in-charge of Power Houses and

--- Page 105 ---
other Administrative offices under the control of the said Boards, provided that the
articles posted by them relate solely to the business of the respective Boards.
(x) The Secretary, Damooar Valley Corporation, provided that the articles posted by
him relate solely to the business of the office of corporation.
(y) Secretary, Dental Council of India, provided that the articles posted by him relate
solely to the business of Council.
(z) The Secretary, Indian Central Arecanut committee, provided that the articles
posted by him relate solely to the business of the Committee.
(aa) Coal Mines Provident Fund Commissioner, provided that the articles posted by
him relate solely to the business of the said Fund.
(bb) The Secretary, the Cotton Textiles Fund Committee, Bombay, provided that the
articles posted by him relate solely to the business of the said Committee.
(cc) The Secretary, Indian Central Coconut Committee, Ernakulam, provided that the
articles posted by him relate solely to the business of the said Committee.
(dd) The Secretary, Indian Central Tobacco Committee and Officers-in-Charge of
various research and other schemes conducted from funds placed at their disposal by
the said Committee provided that the articles posted by them relate solely to the
business of the said Committee.
(ee) Persons who are entitled by Rules made under Section 60 of the Representation
of the People Act, 1951 (XLIII of 1951) or public servant who are entitled by Rules made
under clause (d) of sub-section (2) of section 169 of the said Act, to give their votes by
Postal Ballot, provided that the article posted relates solely to the giving of such Vote.
Explanation.- Every such postal ballot shall be deemed to be an official postal article for
the purpose of this rule.
(ff) The Director, Central Coconut Research Station, Kasarood and Joint Director,
Central Coconut Research Station, Kayangulam, provided that the articles posted by
them relate solely to the business of the said Research Stations.
(gg) The Secretary, Indian Central Oilseeds Committee provided that the articles
posted by him relate solely to the business of the said Committee.

--- Page 106 ---
(hh) The Secretary, Central Council of Gosamvardhana provided that the articles
posted by him relate solely to the business of the said Council.
(ii) The President, Board of Education, West Bengal, provided the articles posted by
them relate solely to the public business of the Board.
(jj) The Secretary, Board of High School and Intermediate Education, Ajmer, Bhopal,
and Vindhya Pradesh and the Secy, Board of Secondary Education, Orissa, provided
that the articles posted by such secretary relate solely to the public business of the said
Board.
(kk) The Secretary, The State Primary Education Board, Assam, provided that the
articles posted by him relate solely to the public business of the said Board.
(ll) Arbitrators appointed under the specific orders of the Registrar of Cooperative
societies in Madras State to attend to arbitration work connected therewith provided
that the articles posted by them relate solely to such arbitration.
(mm) The Central Provident Fund Commissioner and all Regional Provident Fund
Commissioner in India and the Provident Fund Inspector at Kutch appointed under the
Employees’ Provident Fund Scheme, 1952, provided that the articles posted by them
relate solely to the business of Employees’ Provident Fund.
(nn) University Grants Commission provided that the articles posted by them relate
solely to the business of the said Commission.
(oo) District councils of the autonomous districts of Assam constituted by the Sixth
Schedule to the Constitution of India, including the Pawi-Lakher Regional Council in
the Mizo autonomous district of Assam, provided that the articles posted by them relate
solely to the business of the said Councils.
(pp) The Secretary, the Indian Council of Medical Research, provided that the articles
posted by him relate solely to the business of the said Council.
(qq) The Chairman, Secretary, Rubber Production Commissioner, Junior Field
Officers and Rubber Instructors of the Rubber Board, provided that the articles posted
by them relate solely to the business of the said Board.
(rr) The Chief Administrator and the Chairman of the Rehabilitation Finance
Administration and the Officers-in-Charge of the branches of the said administration at
Calcutta, Gauhati, Lucknow and Bombay, provided that the articles posted by them
relate solely to the business of the said Administration.

--- Page 107 ---
(ss) Officers of the Neyyeli Lignite Corporation (Private) Limited at Madras and its
Field Offices at Neyyeli in the South Arcot District of Madras, provided that the articles
posted by them relate solely to the business of the said Corporation.
(tt) The General Manager, Bihar State Road Corporation, Bombay State Road
Corporation or Saurashtra State Road Corporation, provided that the articles posted by
any such General Manager relate solely to the business of the Corporation of which he
is the General Manager.
(uu) The Director and the Registrar of the Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur,
Bombay, and Madras, provided that the articles posted by them relate solely to the
business of the said Institute.
(vv) The Chairman and Secretary of the Central Silk Board, provided that the articles
posted by them relate solely to the business of the said Board.
(ww) The Chairman and Administrative Officer of the West Bengal Development
Corporation provided that the articles posted by them relate solely to the business of
the said Corporation.
(xx) The Secretary, National Book Trust of India (Bhartiya Granth Prakashan)
provided that the articles posted by them relate solely to the business of the said Trust.
(yy) The Chairman and Secretary of the Bombay Housing Board, provided that the
articles posted by them relate solely to the business of the said Board.
(zz) The Administrator and the Chairman of the Territorial Council in the Union
Territory of Himachal Pradesh, Manipur and Tripura and Officers-in-charge of other
Administrative offices under the control of the said council, provided that the articles
posted by them relate solely to the business of the Council.
(aaa) Secretary, Central Board for Workers’ Education, Nagpur and Administrative
Officers of Regional Offices of the said Board, provided that the articles posted by them
relate solely to the business of the said Board.
(bbb) Secretary, Oil and Natural Gas Commission, Dehra Dun , provided that the
articles posted by him relate solely to the business of the said Commission.
(ccc) State Khadi and Village Industries Board, Madras, provided that the articles
posted by them relate solely to the business of the said Board.

--- Page 108 ---
(ddd) The Director of the Indian School of Mines, Dhanbad, provided that the articles
posted by them relate solely to the business of the said School.
184. Correspondence sent by an officer of a local authority, or by any officer of the
Government acting in a capacity connected with a local authority, such as the President
or Secretary of a Local Fund Committee, shall not be deemed official correspondence
within the meaning of these rules and may not be super-scribed as “On Indian
Government Service”. But nothing in this rule shall be held to prevent the transmission
“On India Government Service” of correspondence sent by an officer of the
Government acting as such although the correspondence may relate to the affairs of a
local authority.
Illustration.- The Commissioner of a Division, writing in that capacity to the Secretary
of a Local Fund Committee concerning its affairs, may superscribe the letter “ On Indian
Government Service”.
185. The postage and other charges (if any) on an official postal article can be
properly prepaid only by a proper service stamp or stamps or by a proper impression
or impressions of stamping machines. Where, however, an ordinary postage stamp
instead of a service stamp is used on an official postal article, the article shall be
recognized as an official postal article by the Post Office; but the irregularity shall be
brought by the Officer-in-charge of the post office at which the article was so posted, to
the notice of the officer concerned and, if of frequent occurrence, to that of the
Postmaster General. Service stamps cannot be used for prepayment of postage on
private correspondence.
186. (1) Omitted.
(2) Letters, post cards and packets sent by private persons to officers of the
Government containing, communications which the sender is required by law or rule to
make, if superscribed “ Service Unpaid” shall, if not refused and returned un-opened
by the addressee, be charged, on delivery, with postage at the same rates as for ordinary
unpaid articles.
187. The amount of postage marked as due on postal articles delivered under the
superscriptions of “ Service Unpaid” or “ on India Government Service” or “On
Service” shall be initialed by the postmaster, or other officer authorized in this behalf by
the Postmaster General, of the office of delivery, and whenever any alteration is
necessary in the amount as entered in figures, the amount due shall be written in words
and attested by the signature, in full, of the postmaster or other officer aforesaid.

--- Page 109 ---
Officers of the Government shall be bound to receive and to pay any postage which
may be due on articles addressed to them under the superscription “ On India
Government Service” or “ On Service” and bearing the signature in full of the sender.
Service stamps shall not be accepted in payment of postage due on such articles.
II.- FOREIGN OFFICIAL CORRESPONDENCE
188.- Official correspondence transmitted by the foreign post shall be subject to the
same rates and be governed by the same rules as private correspondence. Service
Stamps shall not however be used on official Correspondence addressed to Foreign
Countries.
189.- The amount of postage marked as due of postal articles received by the foreign
post for delivery to officers of the Government shall be initialed by the postmaster, or
other officer authorized in this behalf by the Postmaster General, of the office of
delivery.
PART VII: - GENERAL RULES
I. - MANAGER OF PREPAYMENT OF POSTAGE AND OTHER CHARGES OF
POSTAL ARTICLES.
190. - Whether the postage or other fees of sums chargeable on a postal article is
prepaid or are prepaid, the prepayment shall be made either by means of a proper
stamp or stamps provided for the purpose by the orders of the Central Government
under Section 16 of the Act or by means of a proper impression or impressions of
stamping machines or in cash, subject to such terms and conditions as the Director
General may from time to time prescribe.
Provided that in the case of postal articles posted on the high seas on
board a ship and included in a mail bag made over by the master of that ship to any
Post Office at any port of call of the ship for further disposal, prepayment by means of
postage stamps valid in the country where the ship stands registered may be considered
as valid payment under this rule.
NOTE 1. Postage stamps bearing the effigy of Her Late Majesty Queen Victoria and
His Late Majesty King Edward VII shall, with effect from the 1st September, 1938, not be
accepted in payment of postage or other sums.
NOTE 2. For the purpose of this Rule and Rule 181 and notwithstanding anything
contained in Rule 185 “OFFICIAL PAID” envelopes referred to in Rule 181(2) shall be

--- Page 110 ---
considered as having been fully prepaid with postage, even though such articles do not
bear any service postage stamps or impression of a stamping machine. The postage
realized on these envelopes shall be at the rate of 16 paise each, for the present which
shall be collected from the war Department under Separate arrangements.
NOTE 3.- For the purpose of Rules 190, 192, 193, and 194, the postage stamp or
stamps, Postcards (single or reply), Inland Cards. Embossed Envelopes, Air Letter
forms and Registration Envelopes, on which value is denoted in terms of rupees, annas
and pies shall, with effect on from the 1st April, 1957, be sold and accepted in each case
in payment of postage or other sums for the values denoted in terms of the decimal
coinage as shown in the following Schedule:
SCHEDULE
Postage Stamps Denoted value in terms of Paise
Adhesive postage stamps
3 pies . . 2 Paise
6 pies . . 3 Paise
9 pies . . 5 Paise
1 anna . . 6 Paise
1 anna and 6 pies . . 10 Paise
2 annas . . 13 Paise
2 annas and 6 pies . . 16 Paise
3 annas . . 20 Paise
3 annas and 6 pies . . 23 Paise
4 annas . . 25 Paise
4 ½ annas . . 28 Paise
6 annas . . 37 Paise
8 annas . . 50 Paise

--- Page 111 ---
10 annas . . 63 Paise
12 annas . . 75 Paise
14 annas . . 88 Paise
1 Rupee and 2 annas . . 1 Rupee and 13 Paise
1 Rupee and 8 annas . . 1 Rupee and 50 Paise
POSTAL STATIONERY
Items of Postal Stationery Denoted value in terms of Paise
9 pies postcard (Inland) Single . . 5 Paise
1 ½ annas postcards (Inland) Reply . . 10 Paise
6 pies postcards (Local) Single . . 3 Paise
1 anna postcards (Local) Reply . . 6 Paise
1 ½ annas Picture postcards . . 10 Paise (Postage 5 Paise and
stationery charges 5 P.)
4 annas Airmail postcards (Foreign) . . 25 Paise
2 annas Embossed square envelopes . . 13 Paise
12 annas Blue Airmail envelopes . . 75 Paise
14 annas Blue Airmail envelopes . . 88 Paise
9 ½ annas Registration envelopes (To be sold for . . 73 Paise
73 Paise after affixing 2 annas or 13 Paise stamp) (Registration fee 50 Paise plus
postage 13 Paise plus stationery
charges 10 Paise).
1 anna and 6 pies Inland letter . . 10 Paise

--- Page 112 ---
6 annas Aerogrammes . . 37 Paise
8 annas Aerogrammes . . 50 Paise
10 annas Aerogrammes . . 63 Paise
12 annas Aerogrammes . . 75 Paise
3 annas Aerogrammes . . 20 Paise
5 annas Aerogrammes . . 31 Paise.
191. - The postage and other charges shall not be deemed to be prepaid
by means of a proper stamp-
(a) if the stamp is a stamp which has not been provided for use as a postage
stamp under section 16 of the Act, or
(b) if the stamp has been obliterated, defaced, torn, cut or otherwise rendered
imperfect, or
(c) if the stamp has upon it any word, letter, figure, or design or printed or
impressed upon it, otherwise than by the authority or the Central Government
before posting, or
(d) If the stamp has been cut or otherwise separated from an embossed
envelope or from a postcard or wrapper :
Provided that nothing in this rule shall prevent the perforation of postage stamps
with initials, or other identifying marks, traced in minute holes.
NOTE,- The special registration envelopes provided by the Post Office, bearing
embossed stamps denoting the registration fee and the initial rate of letter postage,
cannot be used for the transmission of unregistered postal articles.
II. - PRICE OF STAMPS
192.- Adhesive postage stamps shall be sold in each case for the denoted
value of the stamp or stamps.

--- Page 113 ---
193. - Plain postcards and letter (single and reply) shall be sold for the
denoted value of the stamp or stamps which they bear.
194. - The embossed envelopes (square, commercial and airmail), letter
cards and the registration envelopes specified below shall be sold at the following
prices, namely: -
Embossed Envelopes
For each (Inland) envelope . . Rs. 5/-
For each Inland ( letter card) . . . Rs 2.50
For each (Foreign) envelope (Airmail) . . Rs. 6.50
Registration Envelopes
(i) For each small envelope .. Rs. 22/-+ 50 paise stationery charges
(ii) For each large envelope .. Rs. 22/-+ Re. 1/- stationery charges
194- A Deleted.
194- B. (1) No person shall sell or distribute postage stamps or deal in any other
manner in postage stamps except under and in accordance with the terms and
conditions of a license issued by the Central Government or by such officer or
authority as the Central Government may authorize in this behalf.
(2) whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-rule (1) or any term or condition
of a license issued there under shall be punishable with fine which may extend to
fifty rupees.
(3) Nothing in this Rule shall apply in respect of the sale of postage stamps by-
(a) any post office;
(b) any official of the post office while on duty;
(c) any philatelic agency;
(d) any hospital, sanatorium or similar other institution;
(e) any institute for the recreation of sailors, soldiers or airmen;
(f) such other person or at such other places as the Central Government may
be notification in the Official Gazette, specify.

--- Page 114 ---
195. Omitted (Vide GSR 58(E) dated 31st January 2011)
IV. - LATE LETTERS, POSTCARDS OR PACKETS
196. During such hours as the Postmaster General may prescribe, letters, letter cards,
postcards of packets intended for dispatch by any mail may be presented at the window
of the Post Office, Railway Mail Service Office or Section except on Sundays when
unregistered letters, letter cards, postcards or packets may be posted in special letter
boxes provided for the purpose in Departmental Telegraph Office, selected combined
offices and Railway Mail Service Officers or in letter boxes or provided in Railway Mail
Service. Sections, and registered newspapers or packets of registered newspapers may
be accepted in offices specially authorized by the Postmaster General in this behalf.
The articles so presented or posted shall be accepted for dispatch by inland or
foreign post if the postage and fee required by or under Rule 197 have been prepaid.
Provided that no late fee shall be chargeable on registered news-papers or
packets of registered newspapers accepted for posting on Sundays by offices, specially
authorized by the Postmaster-General.
197. (1) The late fee shall ordinarily be chargeable at the following rates:-
Inland Postal Articles –
For each unregistered letter, letter card, postcard or packet .. Rupees two
For each registered letter, letter card postcard or packet . . Rupees three
Vide GSR 23 (E) dated 11th January 2002
Foreign Postal Articles –
For each letter, air letter, (aerogramme), postcard or packet, whether registered
unregistered. . . Rs. 2.00

--- Page 115 ---
(2) The Director General may direct that a higher fee than that prescribed by sub-
rule (1), but not exceeding rupees three, shall be charged on late letters, letter cards,
postcards or packets posted in certain Post offices. RMS offices or sections or on board
the steamers or in other special circumstances. All such fees and the circumstances in
which they are chargeable shall be notified in the Gazette of India.
Vide GSR 23 (E) dated 11th January 2002
198. Deleted.
199. Deleted.
200. Deleted.
V. RE-DELIVERY TO THE SENDER OR ALTERATION OR CORRECTIONS OF
ADDRESS OF POSTAL ARTICLES IN THE COURSE OF TRANSMISSION BY
POST.
201. (1) Subject to the provisions of this rule. The sender of a postal article (hereinafter
in this rule referred to as the sender) posted in India may have it withdrawn from the
post, or have its address altered, so long as the article:-
(a) has not been delivered to the addresses;
(b) has not been confiscated or destroyed by the competent authorities of the country in
which the article may be for the time being;
(c) has not been seized by virtue of any law of the country of destination.
(2) No postal article shall be recalled nor shall the address thereon be altered under this
rule except under and in accordance with the orders of the Central Government, the
Director-General, Postmaster-General or such other authority as may be authorized in
this behalf.

--- Page 116 ---
(3) An application for the recall or alteration of address of a Postal article under this rule
may be made by the sender or by any other person authorized by him in writing in this
behalf to any of the authorities referred to in sub-rule (2) either directly or through any
officer-in-charge of a post office:
Provided that no application shall be entertained under this sub-rule in respect of
a postal article addressed to a foreign country unless such article is addressed to a
country notified in this behalf by the Director-General in the Post Office Guide:
Provided further that every such application shall be accompanied by a
statement (which may be enclosed in a sealed cover) indicating the reasons why
redelivery is sought. The sealed cover shall be opened only by the authority authorized
to issue the order of redelivery or where such authority is the Central Government, by a
Secretary to the Central Government.
(4) An application made under Sub-rule (3) shall be accompanied by a fee calculated
at the rate of rupees Six for each postal article to which it relates:
Vide GSR 23 (E) dated 11th January 2002
Provided that where the application is in respect of several postal articles, posted
at the same time, at the same office, by the same sender, to the same addressee, the
articles so posted shall be treated as a single article for calculating the fee:
Provided also that the fees paid under this sub-rule shall in no circumstances be
refunded.
(5) Where the application is in respect of an insured or registered article, it shall also be
accompanied by a copy of the original receipt granted by the post office and fresh
postage necessary.
(6) An application made under sub-rule (3) may contain a request that any
communication that may have to be addressed to offices in India or foreign countries
for recalling the postal article or altering the address thereon may be transmitted by air
mail or by telegraph and in such a case, the sender shall be liable to pay the amount of
air mail or telegraph charges payable on such communications.
(7) The Central Government shall not incur liability be reason of misdelivery of any
postal article contrary to an application made under this rule.

--- Page 117 ---
(8) Nothing in this rule shall preclude a sender of a postal article from making a request
for a simple correction of the address (not involving alteration of the name or status of
the addressee) direct to the office of destination of the article.
VI. – DETENTIION IN THE POST OFFICE OF BOOK AND
PATTERN PACKETS AND PARCLES.
202. (1) For the purpose of preferential treatment in sorting transmission and
delivery, postal articles are divided into the following four group in the following order
namely:-
(a) Postcards, Letter cards, Money orders and standard envelopes as defined in sub-rule
(4) of rule 8.
(b) Letters (other than standard envelopes as defined in sub rule 4 of rule 8) and
surcharge air-mail articles.
(c) Standard articles as defined in sub-rule (5) of rule 8;
(d) all other postal articles.
(2) Postal articles of any of the groups above may be detained in sorting, transmission
or delivery if it is necessary to do so to expedite the sorting, transmission or delivery of
postal articles in the group or groups higher in the preferential order mentioned in sub
rule (1)
Vide GSR 965 dated 12/12/1989
203. Deleted
204. Deleted
205. Deleted
206. Deleted
207. Deleted
Vide GSR 965 dated 12/12/1989
VII. -DETENTION AND DISPOSAL OF UNDELIVERED POSTAL ARTICLES.

--- Page 118 ---
At the Post Office of address.
208. (1) An undelivered postal article, the addressee of which Is not known or has left
the station of address without intimating his fresh address at the post office, shall
ordinarily be kept in deposit in the head, sub. or branch post office to which it is
addressed for a period of seven days after all enquiries to find the addressee have
proved unsuccessful.
(2) An undelivered postal article, on which the words “Poste Restante”. “ To await
arrival”, or similar instructions have been written, shall remain in the post office to
which it s addressed for a period not exceeding one month-
(a) has refused or after due notice omitted to take delivery within the period
specified in the notice, or
(b) for a period of one month in all other cases.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (1) or sub-rule (2), an
undelivered value, payable post article, whether or not the words ‘Poste Restante’, “To
await arrival,” or similar instructions have been written thereon shall subject to the
proviso to sub-rule (1) of rule 99 remain in the post office to which it is addressed for a
period of seven days only.
(4) An undelivered postal article shall ordinarily not remain in a post office to which
it has been redirected, after it has been ascertained that the addressee cannot be found.
(5) An undelivered telegram, which is in course of transmission by post shall remain
in the post office to which it is addressed, for a period of three days from the date on
which it reached that office.
209. An undelivered postal article, of which the addressee-
(a) has refused or after due notice omitted to take delivery, or
(b) is known to have gone away from India without leaving instructions at the post
office as to the redirection of his correspondence, or
(c) is dead and there is no person to whom the article could properly be delivered,
shall not be detained in the post office to which it is addressed.

--- Page 119 ---
In the office of the Postmaster General.
210. Subject to the provision of clause (b) of the proviso to section 39 of the Act, letters
(except postcards and letter cards) which cannot be disposed of under section 38 of the
Act, shall be detained for a period of -
(a) one month, when they are unregistered, and
(b) three months, when they are registered.
On the expiration of the prescribed period, the letters shall be destroyed.
211.(1) Unregistered postcards and letter cards which cannot be disposed of under
section 38 of the Act shall be detained for a period of 72 hours, on the expiration of
which they may be destroyed.
Provided that postcards and letter cards, other than those sent “Service Unpaid”
under the provisions of rule 186 on which the postage has not been prepaid shall be
destroyed forthwith.
(2) Registered postcards and letter cards shall be detained for a period of three
months and then destroyed.
212. Subject to the provisions of section 39, proviso (b), of the Act, packets and
newspapers which cannot be disposed of under section 38 of the Act, shall be dealt with
as follows:-
(a) Packets containing printed papers, obviously without value, such as trade
circulars and price lists, shall be disposed of forthwith by being sold as waste paper or
destroyed.
(b) Other packets and newspapers shall be detained for a period of (i) one month, if
they are unregistered and (ii) three months, If they are registered. On the expiration of
which the packets and newspapers may be disposed of by being sold or destroyed.
Magazines, periodicals and newspapers may, at the option of the Postmaster-General,
be used for any public purpose.
213. Subject to the provisions of section 39, proviso (b) of the Act, parcels which
cannot be disposed of under section 38, shall be detained for a period of three months,
on the expiration of which they may be destroyed.
214. Nothing in these rules shall prevent the immediate destruction of any postal
article in exercise of the powers conferred by section 23, sub-section (3), of the Act.

--- Page 120 ---
VIII. - GRATUITIES TO BE PAID TO MASTERS OF SHIPS.
215. (1) Gratuities shall be payable to the masters of the ships, not being mail ships, in
respect of postal articles and mail bags or other containers received by them for
conveyance on behalf of the Post Office at the following rates, namely:
(a) Letter mails and empty bags shall be payable at the gross general cargo
rates as prevailing from time to time, subject to a reduction of 25%. In case of shipments
to U.S.A., the payment shall be made at the non-contract rates, as prevailing from time
to time subject to a reduction of 25%. On the lines where only net general cargo rates are
quoted, payments shall be made on such net rates as prevailing from time to time
subject to a reduction of 15%.
(b) Parcel mail shall be paid for at two thirds the rates applicable to the letter
mail.
(2) 18 bags of letter mail or empties or 12 bags of parcel mail shall be equivalent to
one shipping ton of 40 cubic feet.
(3) In calculating gratuities payable under sub-rule (1) fractions of a Paise not
exceeding one-half shall be ignored and fractions of a Paise exceeding one-half shall be
counted as one Paisa.
216. The gratuities shall be payable at the time when the mail bags are made over to
the masters of the ships by which they are to be conveyed and on the granting of a
receipt for the bags in the form below.-
Received from the Postmaster- -the following mail bags:---
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
From To No. Remarks
‐ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- - - - - - -
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
Total (In figures and words)
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

--- Page 121 ---
A.M.
Dated - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- -
P.M.
Master
S.S. “________________”
N.B.- When one from is not sufficient for all the entries, the forms which are used must
be numbered in consecutive order, and the word “Last” must be written at the top of
the last form.
IX.- AUTHORISING POSTAL OFFICIALS TO SEARCH FOR AND TO
INTERCEPT CERTAIN PROHIBITED ARTICLES
217. Postal articles found in course of transmission by post to bear words,
marks or design of a seditious character shall be made over to the State Criminal
Intelligence Department for disposal. All other postal articles which are sent by post in
contravention of section 20 of the Act, shall be destroyed or otherwise dealt with in such
manner as the Postmaster General may direct.
218. Omitted.
219. Omitted.
220. Deleted.
221. The officers noted below are empowered to search, or cause search to be
made, for any copy of seditious publications, the bringing of which by sea or by land
into (Provinces of) India is prohibited in course of transmission by post to any place in
India. The said officers shall deliver all postal articles reasonably believed or found to
contain such copies of publications to the Director, Intelligence Bureau or any officer
acting in his behalf.
*The Director, Foreign Post, Deputy Director Foreign Post and Assistant Directors
Foreign Post at Bombay and all officers-in-charge of head or sub post offices including

--- Page 122 ---
Deputy and Assistant Postmasters, and all Superintendents Inspectors and Head
Sorters of the Railway Mail Service.
222. Omitted.
223. Omitted.
224. The officers specified below are hereby empowered to search or cause
search to be made, while articles are in the course of transmission by post, for goods the
bringing or taking of which by land, sea or air, into or out of India or the State of
Pondicherry or any part thereof, has been prohibited by general or special order under
Sec. 19 of the Sea Customs Act, 1878 (7 of 1878) or any law or regulation for the time
being in force having the same authority as the said section and to deliver any postal
article found or reasonably believed to contain any of the prohibited goods to the
nearest Customs collector or any other authority empowered to enforce the prohibitions
imposed under the same Law or Regulation.
Lists of Officers:-
(1) Officers-in-charge of Post Offices, RMS Offices and Sections functioning as
Offices of Exchange for letter mails and Parcels (including air mails).
(2) Presidency-Postmasters, Deputy Presidency-Postmasters and Assistant
Presidency-Postmasters at Bombay, Calcutta and Madras.
(3) Director, Deputy Director and Assistant Director Foreign Post, Bombay.
(4) All Head Postmasters.
225. (1) The following articles shall in no circumstances, be forwarded to their
destination, delivered to the addresses or returned to the country of origin but shall be
disposed of in accordance with the provisions of the Act and the rules made there
under:-
(i) Opium, morohine, cocaine and other narcotics, provided that this prohibition
shall not apply to consignments sent in insured boxes or in parcels for a medical or
scientific purpose to countries which admit them on this condition:
(ii) Explosives or inflammable substances;
(iii) - Dangerous substances; and
(iv) Obscene or immoral articles.

--- Page 123 ---
(2) Articles other than those mentioned in sub-rule (1)
and which are prohibited from import into India under any enactments for the time
being in force shall be made over to the nearest Customs Officers for such action as may
be provided in the existing laws, rules or regulations.

--- Page 125 ---
SCHEDULE-I Rule 50-C
Countries to Limits of weight and size of articles International Speed Post Charges
Places and Post offices which
First Every
where outward articles articles may
Countries 250gms. addition
may be booked be booked
Or part al 250
thereof gms. or
part
weight Size
thereof
2 3 4 5 6 7
1 Rs. Rs.
1.United 20 kg Size shall not exceed 900 millimetres Afghanistan 638 52
DELHI Kingdom for any one dimension or two meters
1. Delhi G.P.O for the sum of the length and the
greatest circumference measured in 805 200
2.Parliament Street H.O a direction other than that of the Argentina
length. 630 155
3.Lodi Road H.O. Australia
905 90
4.Nehru Place S.O 2.Federal 20 kg. Size shall not exceed 1.05 meters for Austria
Republic of any one dimension or three meters 680 50
5.Extn. Counter Germany for the sum of length and the Bahrain
Ghaziabad H.O. greatest circumference measured in
a direction other than that of the 485 35
6.Extn.Counter length. Bangladesh
Faridabad N.I.T H.O of
Delhi
3. Hong 10 kg. Size shall not exceed 1.05 meters for 615 165
7.Extn. Counter Noida Kong any one dimension or two meters for Barbados
Complex S.O. of Delhi the sum of the length and the
greatest circumference measured in 930 85
8.Eastern Court P.O a direction other than that of the Belarus
length. 785 100
9.Delhi Foreign Post Belgium
Office
4. Japan 20 kg. Size shall not exceed 1.50 meters for 575 150
10. Extn. Counter any one dimension or three meters Bermuda
Safdarjung Airport for the sum of the length and the
Sorting Office greatest circumference measured in
Vide S.O no. 314 (E) a direction other than that of the
01/05/1989 length.
370 35
Bombay 20 kg. Size shall not exceed 900 millimetres Bhutan
5. U.S.A for any one dimension or 2 meters 950 110
1.Bombay G.P.O for the sum of the length and the Botswana
greatest circumference measured in 400 65
7. Dadar H.O a direction other than that of the Brunei
length. Darussalam

--- Page 126 ---
650 85
3.Kalbadevi H.O Length plus breadth plus girth Bulgaria
should not exceed 900 mm. and no (Rep)
6. Bahrain 10 kg. single dimension should exceed 600 505 55
4.Mandvi H.O mm. In roll form the length plus Cambodia
twice the diameter should not 930 165
5.Nariman Point P.O exceed 1040 mm. and the length Canada
should not exceed 900 mm. 825 150
6.Marine Lines P.O Cape Verde
780 175
7.Taj Mahal Hotel P.O Cayman
Island
7.Bangladesh 10 kg. Length plus breadth plus girth 400 65
8.Dr. DeshmukhMarg should not exceed 900 mm. and no China
P.O single dimension should exceed 600 (People’s
mm. In roll form the length plus Republic)
twice the diameter should not 875 190
9.World P.O exceed 1040 mm. and the length Cuba
should not exceed 900 mm. 760 75
10.Ghatkopar West Cyprus
P.O 8.Belgium 15 kg Length plus breadth plus girth
should not exceed 900 mm. and no 950 110
11. J.B. Nagar P.O single dimension should exceed 600 Democratic
mm. In roll form the length plus Republic of
twice the diameter should not Congo
exceed 1040 mm. and the length 1030 100
12. Andheri R.S.P.O should not exceed 900 mm. Denmark
730 75
13.Bombay Airport 9.Egypt 10 kg. Length plus breadth plus girth Egypt
P.O should not exceed 900 mm. and no
single dimension should exceed 600 790 180
14.Kalyan R.S.P.O mm. In roll form the length plus EL Salvador
twice the diameter should not 760 75
15.Extn. Counter W.T exceed 1040 mm. and the length Eritrea
Estate Thana P.O of should not exceed 900 mm.
Bombay
10.France 20 kg. Size shall not exceed 1.50 meters 755 75
16. Omitted for any one dimension or three Estonia
Vide S.O No 68 (E) meters for the sum of the length &
dated 10/01/1989 the greatest circumference measured
in a direction other than that of the 995 75
17.Extn Counter Nasik length. Ethiopia
H.O. of Bombay
480 150
18.Bombay Foreign Size shall not exceed 1.50 metres for Fiji
Post Office 11.Greece 20 kg. any one dimension or three meters
for the sum of the length & the 815 105
19.Visveswanaya greatest circumference measured in France
World Trading Centre a direction other than that of the
P.O length.

--- Page 127 ---
910 65
20.Stock Exchange P.O 12. Iraq 10 kg. Length plus breadth plus girth Georgia
should not exceed 900 mm. and no 865 100
21.Sion R.S. P.O single dimension should exceed 600 Germany
mm. In roll form the length plus 455 120
22.Chembur P.O twice the diameter should not Ghana
exceed 1040 mm. and the length 925 85
23.R.K PatkarMrg P.O should not exceed 900 mm. Greece
830 185
24.Extn.Counter
Mahim P.O Guyana
Size shall not exceed 1.50 meters for 590 60
25.Extn. Counter 13. Ireland 20 kg. any one dimension or three meters Hong Kong
Prabha Devi P.O. for the sum of the length & the
greatest circumference measured in 930 90
Calcutta a direction other than that of the Hungary
length. 960 115
1.Calcutta G.P.O Iceland
440 70
2.Park Street H.O Indonesia
900 60
3.Barabazar H.O 14.Macau 20 kg. Size shall not exceed 1.50 meters for Iran
any one dimension or three meters 590 65
4.Calcutta Airport P.O for the sum of the length & the Iraq
greatest circumference measured in 1030 110
5.Beadon Street P.O a direction other than that of the Ireland
length. 760 75
6.Bow Bazar P.O Israel
975 95
7.Entaly P.O. Italy
15.Netherlan 20 kg. Size shall not exceed 1.50 meters for 420 90
8.Ballygunge P.O. d any one dimension or three meters Japan
for the sum of the length & the 760 75
9.Lala LajpatRaiSarai greatest circumference measured in Jordan
P.O a direction other than that of the
length. 925 80
10.Kidderpore P.O Kenya
410 75
11.Alipore H.O. Korea
16. Oman 20 kg. Length plus breadth plus girth (Republic
should not exceed 900 mm. and no of)
single dimension should exceed 600 665 60
12.Rash Bihari Avenue mm. In roll form the length plus Kuwait
P.O twice the diameter should not
exceed 1040 mm. and the length 695 90
13.Esplanade P.O should not exceed 900 mm. Latvia
865 100
14.Calcutta Foreign 17. Pakistan 20 kg. Size shall not exceed 1.05metres for Luxembour
P.O any one dimension or two meters for g
the sum of the length & the greatest 395 60
Madras circumference measured in a Macao

--- Page 128 ---
direction other than that of the (china)
length. 700 95
1.Madras G.P.O Malawi
900 55
2.Anna Road H.O Malaysia
18. Portugal 20 kg. Size shall not exceed 1.05metres for 375 50
3.T.Nagar H.O any one dimension or two meters for Maldives
the sum of the length & the greatest 765 80
4.Meenambakkam S.O. circumference measured in a Mauritius
direction other than that of the 880 195
5.Flower Bazar P.O length. Mexico
670 65
6.Nunganbakkam 19.Senegal 20 kg. Length plus breadth plus girth Mongolia
High Road P.O. should not exceed 900 mm. and no
single dimension should exceed 600 800 115
7.Extn. CounterPadi mm. In roll form the length plus Morocco
P.O of Madras. twice the diameter should not
exceed 1040 mm. and the length 640 110
8.Extn. Counter should not exceed 900 mm. Namibia
Greames Road P.O. of
Madras Size shall not exceed 900 mm. for
20.Spain 20 kg. any one dimension or two meters for 580 150
9. Extn. Counter the sum of the length and the Nauru
Guindly Industrial greatest circumference measured in
Estate P.O of Madras a direction other than that of the
length. 365 35
10.Extn. Counter Nepal
Nandanam P.O. of Size shall not exceed 1.05 meters for
Madras 21. Sweden 20 kg. any one dimension or three meters
for the sum of the length and the 1050 100
11.Madras Sorting greatest circumference measured in Netherlands
a direction other than that of the 520 185
12.Extn. Counter length. New
Adyar Zealand
450 115
13.Extn. Counter Niger
Teynamepet Size shall not exceed 1.05 metres for
22. 20 kg. any one dimension or three meters 840 115
14.Extn. Counter Anna Switzerland for the sum of the length and the Nigeria
Nagar. greatest circumference measured in
a direction other than that of the 1310 100
15.Madras Foreign length. Norway
P.O.
650 50
Ahmedabad 23. Tunisia 15 kg. Size shall not exceed 1.05 meters for Oman
any one dimension or two meters for 490 40
1.Ahmedabad G.P.O the sum of the length and the Pakistan
greatest circumference measured in 1025 180
2.Ahmedabad a direction other than that of the Panama
Railwaypura S.O. length. (Rep)

--- Page 129 ---
680 150
3.Ahmedabad 24. Turkey 10 kg. Length plus breadth plus girth Papua New
Navrangpura S.O. should not exceed 900 mm. and no Guinea
single dimension should exceed 600 405 75
4.Ahmedabad R.M.S mm. In roll form the length plus Philippines
twice the diameter should not 775 90
5.Amedabad Sub- exceed 1040 mm. and the length Poland
Foreign Post should not exceed 900 mm.
720 115
Bangalore 25. United 20 kg. Size shall not exceed 1.50 metres for Portugal
Arab any one dimension or three meters 740 55
1.Bangalore G.P.O. Emirates for the sum of the length and the Qatar
greatest circumference measured in 695 90
2. Bangalore city H.O. a direction other than that of the Rwanda
length. 1005 80
3.Extn. Counter Hosur Romania
P.O. of Bangalore. 26. Austria 20 kg. Size shall not exceed 1.50 metres for
any one dimension or three meters For
4.Bangalore sub- for the sum of the length and the Moscow
Foreign Post. greatest circumference measured in &
a direction other than that of the St.Peters
length. Russia berg
1040 80
27. Australia 20 kg. Size shall not exceed 1.05 metres for
any one dimension or two meters for Rest of
the sum of the length and the girth. Russian
The item should not measure less Federation 80
than 90 x 140 mm. with a tolerance 1160
of 2 mm. 745 60
Cochin Saudi
28.U.S.S.R 20 kg. Size shall not exceed 1.05 meters for Arabia
any one dimension & two metes for 820 150
1. Errakulam H.O the sum of the length and the Senegal
greatest circumference measured in 430 60
2. Wellington Island a direction other than that of the Singapore
P.O length.
Rest of
3. Udyogmandal 29.Thailand 20 kg. Size shall not exceed 1.50 metres in Spain Spain
P.O. any direction or exceed a total of 795 110
three meters for the sum of the
longest side and the greatest For
circumference other than canary
longitudinal. Islands 110
1145
Size shall not exceed 1.50 metres for 415 40
4. Cochin sub foreign 30. Norway 20 kg. any one dimension or three metres Sri Lanka
P.O for the sum of length and the
greatest circumference measured in 920 80
Hyderabad a direction other than that of the Sudan
length. 1015 95
1. Hyderabad G.P.O Sweden

--- Page 130 ---
31.Luxembou 20 kg. Size shall not exceed 1.50 metres for 1175 100
2.Secunderabad H.O. rg any one dimension or three metres Switzerland
for the sum of length and the 515 75
3.Hyderabad Air greatest circumference measured in Taiwan
Sorting a direction other than that of the
length.
770 85
Guwahati Tanzania
32.Singapore 20 kg. Size shall not exceed 1.05 metres for
380 50
any one dimension or two metres for
1.Guwahati H.O. Thailand
the sum of length and the greatest
705 100
circumference measured in a
Indore Tunisia
direction other than that of the
645 80
length.
1. Yashwant Road Turkey
H.O.
33.Republic 20 kg. Size shall not exceed 105 cms. for
895 50
of Korea any one dimension or 200 cms. for
Jaipur United Arab
the sum of the length and the
Emirates(U
greatest circumference measured in
AE)
a direction other than that of the
length.
930 85
1. Jaipur City S.O. Uganda
34.Rwanda 20 kg. Size shall not exceed 1.50 metres for 955 105
2.Jaipur G.P.O United
any one dimension or three metres
Kingdom of
for the sum of length and the
Great
greatest circumference measured in
Britain
a direction other than that of the
length.
925 80
3.Jaipur Sub Foreign Ukraine
Vide S.O No. 633 (E)
Post office
35.Qatar 20 kg. Size shall not exceed 1.50 metres for 585 165
Kanpur United
any one dimension or three metres
States of
for the sum of length and the
America
greatest circumference measured in
a direction other than that of the
390 55
1. Kanpur H.O.
length.
Vietnam
Vide S.O no. 314 (E) 01/05/1989
515 65
Pune Yemen
36.Argentina 20 kg. Size shall not exceed 1.50 metres for 865 100
1.Pune City H.o.
any one dimension or three metres
South Africa
for the sum of length and the
greatest circumference measured in
No. 43-1/2012-DA Dtd.13.05.2013
a direction other than that of the
2.Pune H.O.
length.
Vide GSR 1211(E) dated 13th May,
2013
3.Chindhwad East 37.Nigeria 20 kg. Size shall not exceed 1.50 metres for
P.O.
any one dimension or three metres
for the sum of length and the
Vadodara
greatest circumference measured in
a direction other than that of the
1.Vadodara H.O.
length.
Vide S.O. No. 180 (E) dated 01/03/1990
2. Vadodara RMS

--- Page 131 ---
Coimbatore
38.Indonesia 10 kg. Size shall not exceed, 900 mm length,
Coimbatore H.O. width and depth combined and 600
mm for the greatest single
Visakhapatnam dimension, or in the form of a roll
1040 mm length, plus twice the
Visakhapatnam H.O. diameter and 90 mm for the greatest
single dimension.
Nagpur
39.Saudia 10 kg. Size shall not exceed 105 cm for any
Nagpur G.P.O Arabia one dimension or 200 cm for the sum
of length and the greatest
Patna circumference measured in a
direction other than that of the
Patna G.P.O length.
Vide S.O.No. 358 (E) dated
Chandigarh 11/5/1990
Chandigarh H.O. 40.People’s 20 kg. Size shall not exceed 105 cm for any
Republic of one dimension or 200 cm for the sum
Sri nagar China of length and the girth
1. Sri nagar H.O.
2. Sri nagar Sub
Foreign Post 41. Sri Lanka 10 kg. Size shall not exceed 610 mm length,
610 mm width and 610 mm depth or
Agartala 900 mm length plus girth.
1. Agartala H.O.
Silchar
1. Silchar H.O. 42. Maldive 20 kg. Size shall not exceed 1.50 metres for
any one dimension or 3 metres for
the sum of length and the greatest
circumference measured in a
direction other than that of the
length.
43. Ethiopia 20 kg. Size shall not exceed 1.50 metres for
Magalore any one dimension or 3metres for
the sum of length and the greatest
Mangalore H.O circumference measured in a
direction other than that of the
Agra length.
Agra H.O.
Shilong

--- Page 132 ---
44.New 10 kg. Size shall not exceed 2 metres in
Shilong H.O. Zealand length, width/and depth combined
and 1.05 metres for the greatest
Trichy single dimension or in the form of a
roll 1040 mm (3”5”) in length plus
Tiruchirapalli H.O. twice the diameter and 900 mm
(3”0”) for the greatest single
Madurai dimension.
Madurai H.O 45.Canada 20 kg Size shall not exceed one metre for
any one dimension or two metres for
Trivendrum the sum of elngth land the greatest
circumference measured in a
Trivendrum H.O. dimension toher than that of the
length.
Jammu
46.Cyprus 20 kg Size shall not exceed 1.50 metres for
Jammu Tawi H.O. any one dimension or 3 metres for
the sum of length and the greatest
Shimla circumference measured in a
direction other than that of the
Shimla H.O. length.
Meerut 47. Sudan 20 kg. The sum of length and greatest
circumference measureed in a
Meerut H.O. direction other than length shall not
exceed 3 metres and any single
Kanchipuram dimension shall not exceed 1.5
metres.
Kanchipuram H.O.
Size shall not exceed 1.50 metres for
Varanasi 48. Maldive 20 kg. any one dimension or three metres
for the sum of length and the
Varanasi H.O. greatest circumference measured in
a direction other than that of the
Vide S.O No. 886 (E)
length.
dated 26/09/1988
Allahbad 49. Mexico 20 kg Size shall not exceed 1.50 metres for
any one dimension or three metres
Allahbad HO
for the sum of length and the
greatest circumference measured in
Tirupur
a direction other than that of the
length.
Tirupur HO
50. Zaire 20 kg. Maximum 1.50 metres in length and
Pondicherry
3 metres for the sum of the length
and the alrgest circumference taken
Pondicherry HO
in a direction other than that of
length.
Ranchi

--- Page 133 ---
Ranchi HO 51.Niger 20 kg. Size shall not exceed 1.50 metres for
any one dimension or 3 metres for
Surat the sum of length and the greatest
circumference measured in a
Surat HO direction other than that of the
length.
Goa
Panaji HO 52. Papua 20 kg. Size shall not exceed 1.50 metres for
New Guinea any one dimension or 3 metres for
Alwaye the sum of length and the greatest
circumference measured in a
Alwaye HO direction other than that of the
length.
Vide S.O No. 68 (E)
53. Denmark 20 kg. Size shall not exceed 1.50 metres for
Dated 10/01/1989 any one dimension or 3 metres for
the sum of length and the greatest
Moradabad circumference measured in a
direction other than that of the
Moradabad H.O. length.
Gorakhpur 54.Iran 20 kg Length , widht and depth combined
should be 900 mm but the greatest
Gorakhpur H.O. dimension may not exceed 600 mm
with a tolerance of 2 mm.
Quilon
Quilon H.O.
55. Panama 20 kg. Size shall not exceed 1.50 metres for
Jamshedpur any one dimension or 3 metres for
the sum of length and the largest
Jamshedpur H.O. circumference measured in a
direction other than that of the
Vide 478 (E) dated
length.
24/06/1989
56. Guyana 20 kg. Size shall not exceed 1.50 metres for
Dhanbad
any one dimension or 3 metres for
the sum of length and the largest
Dhanbad H.O.
circumference measured in a
direction other than that of the
Vide S.O. No. 804 (E)
length.
12/10/1989
57.Hungary 20 kg. Size shall not exceed 1.50 metres for
Mysore
any one dimension or 3 metres for
the sum of length and the largest
Mysore H.O
circumference measured in a
direction other than that of the
Imphal
length.
Imphal H.O.

--- Page 134 ---
Vide S.O. No. 821(E) 58.Malaysia 10 kg. Size shall not exceed 1.05 metres for
dated 16/10/1989 the greatest single dimension and 2
metres for the sum of the length plus
Calicut the girth.
Calicut H.O.
59.Ghana 20 kg. Size shall not exceed 1.50 metres for
Vide S.O. No. 1078 any one dimension or 3 metres for
dated 29/12/1989 the sum of length and the largest
circumference measured in a
Trichur direction other than that of the
length.
Trichur H.O
60.Uganda 10 kg. Size shall not exceed 1.50 metres for
Vide S.O No. 520 any one dimension or 3 metres for
dated 29/6/1990 the sum of length and the largest
circumference measured in a
Bhubaneshwar direction other than that of the
length.
Bhubaneshwar H.O.
61.Morocco 20 kg. Size shall not exceed 1.00 metres for
Cuttack the largest dimension and 2.00
metres for the sum of the length and
Cuttack H.O. the largest circumference measured
in a direction other than that of the
Salem length.
Salem H.O. 62. Cape 20 kg. Size shall not exceed 1.05 metres for
Verde any one dimension or 2 metres for
Vijayawada the sum of length and the greatest
circumference measured in a
Vijayawada H.O. direction other than that of the
length.
Tirupati
63. El 20 kg Size shall not exceed 1.50 metres for
Tirupati H.O. Dalvador any one dimension or 3 metres for
the sum of length and the greatest
Gwalior circumference measured in a
direction other than that of the
Gwalior H.O. length.
Raipur 64. Kuwait 20 kg. Size shall not exceed 1.50 metres for
any one dimension or 3 metres for
Raipur H.O.
the sum of length and the greatest
circumference measured in a
Bhopal
direction other than that of the
length.
Bhopal H.O.
Lucknow

--- Page 135 ---
65. Yemen 10 kg. Maximum length, width and depth
Lucknow G.P.O. Arab combined should not exceed 900
Republic millimetres but the greatest
dimension may not exceed 600
millimetres with a tolerance of 2
millimetres.
Vide G.S.R 615 (E) dated 20/9/1993
SCHEDULE-II Rule 50-C
Countries to Limits of weight and size of articles International Speed Post Charges
Places and Post offices which articles
First Every
where outward articles may be Countries/Cont 250 additio
may be booked booked inent/ gms. Or nal 250
Size Sub-continent part gms. or
weight thereof part
thereof
2 3 4 5 6 7
1 Rs. Rs.
Afghanistan 638 52
DELHI 1.United 20 kg Size shall not exceed 900 millimetres for any
1. Delhi G.P.O
Kingdom one dimension or two meters for the sum of
the length and the greatest circumference
630 155
measured in a direction other than that of the
2.Parliament Street Australia
length.
H.O
905 90
3.Lodi Road H.O. 2. United 20 kg. Size shall not exceed 900 millimetres for any Austria
States of
one dimension or two meters for the sum of
680 50
the length and the greatest circumference
4.Nehru Place S.O America Bahrain
measured in a direction other than that of the
485 35
length.
5.Extn. Counter Bangladesh
Ghaziabad H.O.
Length plus breadth plus girth should not
3.Bangladesh
10 kg. 615 165
exceed 900 mm. and no single dimension
6.Extn.Counter Barbados
should exceed 600 mm. In roll form the
Faridabad N.I.T H.O
length plus twice the diameter should not
of Delhi
exceed 1040 mm. and the length should not
930 85
exceed 900 mm.
7.Extn. Counter Belarus
Noida Complex S.O.
Size shall not exceed 1.50 metres for any one
4.Greece
of Delhi 20 kg.
dimension or three meters for the sum of the
length & the greatest circumference measured 725 150
8.Eastern Court P.O Bermuda
in a direction other than that of the length.
485 35
9.Delhi Foreign Post Bhutan
Office

--- Page 136 ---
950 110
10. Extn. Counter 5.Macau 20 kg. Size shall not exceed 1.50 meters for any one Botswana
Safdarjung Airport dimension or three meters for the sum of the
Sorting Office length & the greatest circumference measured
Vide S.O no. 314 (E) in a direction other than that of the length.
01/05/1989
515 65
Bombay 6. Switzerland 20 kg. Size shall not exceed 1.05 metres for any one Brunei
dimension or three meters for the sum of the Darussalam
length and the greatest circumference 650 85
1.Bombay G.P.O measured in a direction other than that of the Bulgaria (Rep)
length. 505 55
2.Dadar H.O Cambodia
7. Turkey 20 kg. Length plus breadth plus girth should not 930 165
3.Kalbadevi H.O exceed 900 mm. and no single dimension Canada
should exceed 600 mm. In roll form the
780 175
4.Mandvi H.O length plus twice the diameter should not Cayman Island
exceed 1040 mm. and the length should not
515 65
5.Nariman Point P.O exceed 900 mm. China (People’s
Republic)
8.Thailand 20 kg. Size shall not exceed 1.50 metres in any 875 190
6.Marine Lines P.O direction or exceed a total of three meters for Cuba
the sum of the longest side and the greatest 760 75
7.Taj Mahal Hotel circumference other than longitudinal. Cyprus
P.O
9.Australia 20 kg. Size shall not exceed 1.05 metres for any one
730 75
8.Dr. dimension or two meters for the sum of the Egypt
DeshmukhMarg P.O
length and the girth. The item should not
measure less than 90 x 140 mm. with a
760 75
tolerance of 2 millimetres.
9.World P.O Eritrea
755 75
Size shall not exceed 1.05 metres for any
10.Ghatkopar West 10. Hong Kong 10 kg. Estonia
one dimension or two metres for the sum
P.O
of the length and the greatest
995 75
11. J.B. Nagar P.O circumference measured in a direction Ethiopia
other than that of the length. 595 150
12. Andheri R.S.P.O Fiji
Size shall not exceed 1.50 metres for any one 1045 105
11. United 20 kg.
13.Bombay Airport dimension or three meters for the sum of the France
Arab Emirates
P.O length and the greatest circumference
measured in a direction other than that of the 910 50
14.Kalyan R.S.P.O length. Georgia
1053 100
15.Extn. Counter 12. Netherlands 20 kg. Size shall not exceed 1.50 metres for any one Germany
W.T Estate Thana dimension or three meters for the sum of the
P.O of Bombay length and the greatest circumference
measured in a direction other than that of the
570 125
16. .Omitted length. Ghana

--- Page 137 ---
Vide S.O No 68 (E)
dated 10/01/1989 13.U.S.S.R 20 kg. Size shall not exceed 1.05 metres for any
one dimension or two metres for the sum 925 85
17.Extn Counter of the length and the greatest Greece
Nasik H.O. of circumference measured in a direction
Bombay other than that of the length.
745 60
18.Bombay Foreign Hong Kong
14.Senegal 20 kg. Length plus breadth plus girth should not
Post Office
exceed 900 mm. and no single dimension
should exceed 600 mm. In roll form the 930 90
19.Visveswanaya Hungary
length plus twice the diameter should not
World Trading exceed 1040 mm. and the length should not
Centre P.O exceed 900 mm.
960 115
20.Stock Exchange 15. Bahrain 10 kg. Length plus breadth plus girth should not Iceland
P.O exceed 900 mm. and no single dimension
should exceed 600 mm. In roll form the 1030 110
21.Sion R.S. P.O length plus twice the diameter should not Ireland
exceed 1040 mm. and the length should not 760 75
22.Chembur P.O exceed 900 mm. Israel
975 95
23.R.K PatkarMrg 16. Austria 20 kg. Size shall not exceed 1.50 metres for any one Italy
P.O dimension or three meters for the sum of the
length and the greatest circumference 540 90
24.Extn.Counter measured in a direction other than that of the Japan
Mahim P.O length.
760 75
25.Extn. Counter 17. Pakistan 20 kg. Size shall not exceed 1.05 metres for any one Jordan
Prabha Devi P.O. dimension or two meters for the sum of the
length & the greatest circumference measured
925 80
Calcutta in a direction other than that of the length. Kenya
525 75
18.Federal 20 kg. Size shall not exceed 1.05 meters for any one
1.Calcutta G.P.O Korea (Republic
Republic of dimension or three meters for the sum of
of)
Germany length and the greatest circumference
695 90
measured in a direction other than that of the
2.Park Street H.O Latvia
length.
510 60
3.Barabazar H.O Macao (China)
19.Egypt 10 kg. Length plus breadth plus girth should not
exceed 900 mm. and no single dimension 700 95
4.Calcutta Airport Malawi
should exceed 600 mm. In roll form the
P.O length plus twice the diameter should not
exceed 1040 mm. and the length should not 900 55
5.Beadon Street P.O exceed 900 mm. Malaysia
Vide S.O No. 633 (E) 765 80
6.Bow Bazar P.O Mauritius
670 65
7.Entaly P.O. Mongolia

--- Page 138 ---
800 115
8.Ballygunge P.O. 20.Singapore 20 kg. Size shall not exceed 1.05 metres for any one Morocco
dimension or two metres for the sum of length 640 110
9. Kidderpore P.O and the greatest circumference measured in a Namibia
direction other than that of the length. 580 150
10. Nauru
LalaLajpatRaiSarai 21. Norway 20 kg. Size shall not exceed 1.50 metres for any one
P.O dimension or three metres for the sum of
length and the greatest circumference
485 35
11. Rash Bihari measured in a direction other than that of the Nepal
length.
Avenue P.O
1050 100
12. Esplanade Netherlands
22.Republic of 20 kg. Size shall not exceed 105 cms. for any one
520 185
Korea dimension or 200 cms. for the sum of the
13. Calcutta Foreign New Zealand
length and the greatest circumference
P.O P.O
measured in a direction other than that of the
1310 100
length.
14. Alipore H.O. Norway
650 50
23. Portugal 20 kg. Size shall not exceed 1.05metres for any one
Madras Oman
dimension or two meters for the sum of the
length & the greatest circumference measured 490 40
1.Madras G.P.O in a direction other than that of the length. Pakistan
640 75
2.Anna Road H.O Philippines
24. Oman 20 kg. Length plus breadth plus girth should not 775 90
3.T. Nagar H.O exceed 900 mm. and no single dimension Poland
should exceed 600 mm. In roll form the 720 115
4.Meenambakkam length plus twice the diameter should not Portugal
S.O. exceed 1040 mm. and the length should not
exceed 900 mm. 740 55
5.Flower Bazar P.O Vide S.O no. 314 (E) 01/05/1989 Qatar
1005 80
6.Nunganbakkam 25.Qatar 20 kg. Size shall not exceed 1.50 metres for any one Romania
High Road P.O. dimension or three metres for the sum of
length and the greatest circumference For
7.Extn. Counter Padi measured in a direction other than that of the Russia Moscow&
P.O of Madras. length.(P-118/c) St.Petersber 80
g
26.Spain 20 kg. Size shall not exceed 900 mm. for any one 1160
dimension or two meters for the sum of the
length and the greatest circumference
Rest of
Russian
measured in a direction other than that of the
Federation 80
length.(P-39/c)
1315
820 150
8.Extn. Counter 27. Japan 20 kg. Size shall not exceed 1.50 meters for any one Senegal
dimension or three meters for the sum of the
Greames Road P.O.
length and the greatest circumference
of Madras

--- Page 139 ---
measured in a direction other than that of the 670 60
9. Extn. Counter length. (P-36/c) Singapore
Guindly Industrial
Estate P.O of Madras 28.France 20 kg. Size shall not exceed 1.50 meters for any
one dimension or three meters for the sum of Rest of
10.Extn. Counter the length & the greatest circumference Spain Spain
Nandanam P.O. of measured in a direction other than that of the 795 110
Madras length. (P-37/c)
For canary
Islands 110
29. Ireland 20 kg. Size shall not exceed 1.50 meters for any one
1145
dimension or three meters for the sum of the
920 80
length & the greatest circumference measured
11.Madras Sorting Sudan
in a direction other than that of the length.(P-
1175 100
38/c).
12.Extn. Counter Switzerland
Vide S.O. No. 180 (E) dated 01/03/1990
Adyar
515 75
13.Extn. Counter Taiwan
42.Bermuda 20kg. The sum of length and the greatest
Teynamepet
circumference measured in a direction
770 85
other than length should not exceed 2
14.Extn. Counter Tanzania
meters and any single dimension should
Anna Nagar.
not exceed 1.05 meters.
500 50
15.Madras Foreign Thailand
P.O. Size shall not exceed 1.05 meters for the
43. Kenya 20 kg. greatest single dimension and 3 meters for 645 80
Ahmedabad the sum of the length and the greatest Turkey
circumference measured in a direction
895 50
other than that of the length.
1.Ahmedabad G.P.O United Arab
Emirates (UAE)
930 85
2.Ahmedabad 44. Israel 20 kg. Size shall not exceed 1.05 metres for any one Uganda
Railwaypura S.O.
dimension or 3 meters for the sum of the
length & the greatest circumference measured
955 105
in a direction other than that of the length.
3.Ahmedabad United Kingdom
Navrangpura S.O. of Great Britain
925 80
Size shall not exceed 150 centimetres for
4.Ahmedabad R.M.S 45. Italy 20 kg. Ukraine
any one dimension or 300 contimetres for
585 165
5.Amedabad Sub- the sum of length and the largest United States of
Foreign Post circumference measured in a direction America (USA)
other than that of the length.
505 55
Bangalore Vietnam
Size shall not exceed 1.50 meters for the
46. Vietnam 20 kg. 865 100
longest dimension and 3.00 meters for the
1.Bangalore G.P.O. South Africa
sum of length and the largest
2.Bangalore city H.O circumference measured in a direction No. 43-1/2012-DA Dtd.13.05.2013

--- Page 140 ---
other than that of the length.
3.Extn. Counter Vide GSR 1211(E) dated 13th
Hosur P.O. of Size shall not exceed 1.50 meters for the May, 2013
Bangalore 47. Mauritius 20 kg. longest dimension and 3.00 meters for the
sum of length and the largest
4. Bangalore sub-
circumference measured in a direction
Foreign Post.
other than that of the length.
Cochin
Size shall not exceed 1.50 meters for the
48. Latvia 20 kg. longest dimension and 3.00 meters for the
1. Errakulam H.O
sum of length and the largest
circumference measured in a direction
2. Wellington
other than that of the length.
Island P.O
Size shall not exceed 150 centimetres for
3. Udyogmandal
49. Iceland 20 kg. the longest dimension and 300
P.O.
centimetres for the sum of length and the
4. Cochin sub largest circumference measured in a
foreign P.O direction other than that of the length.
Hyderabad
Size shall not exceed 1.50 meters for the
1. Hyderabad 50. Bhutan 20 kg. longest dimension and three metres for the
G.P.O sum of length and the largest
circumference measured in a direction
2.Secunderabad other than that of the length.
H.O. Vide G.S.R 615 (E) dated 20th September
1993
3.Hyderabad Air
Sorting
Maximum length 1.5 metres
51.Jordan 20 kg. Maximum length + Girth 3 metres
Guwahati
1.Guwahati H.O.
Maximum length 1.50 metres
52.Romania 20 kg. Maximum length + Girth 3.0 metres
Indore
Vide GSR 201 (E) dated 17/5/1996
1. Yashwant Road
53.Combodia 20 kg. Maximum length 1.5 metres
H.O.
Maximum length + Girth 3 metres
Jaipur
54.Eritrea 20 kg. Maximum length 1.5 metres
Maximum length + Girth 3 metres
1. Jaipur City S.O.
55.Estonia 20 kg. Maximum length 1.5 metres
2.Jaipur G.P.O Maximum length + Girth 3 metres

--- Page 141 ---
3.Jaipur Sub Foreign 56.Ukraine 20 kg. Maximum length 1.5 metres
Post office Maximum length + Girth 3 metres
Vide GSR 573 (E) dated 18/12/1996
Kanpur
1. Kanpur H.O.
57. Mangolia 20 kg. Maximum length 1.50 metres
Maximum length + Girth 3.0 metres
Pune
58.Nepal 20 kg. Maximum length 1.50 metres
1.Pune City H.o.
Maximum length + Girth 3.0 metres
2.Pune H.O.
59.Botswana 20 kg. Maximum length 1.50 metres
3.Chindhwad East
Maximum length + Girth 900 metres
P.O.
Vadodara
60.Bulgaria 20 kg. Maximum length 1.50 metres
Maximum length + Girth 3.0 metres
1.Vadodara H.O.
2. Vadodara RMS
61.Barbados 20 kg Maximum length 1.05 metres
Coimbatore Maximum length + Girth 2.5 metres
Coimbatore H.O.
62.Cayman 20 kg. Maximum length 1.50 metres
Visakhapatnam Island Maximum length + Girth 3 metres
Visakhapatnam
H.O. 63.Namibia 20 kg. Maximum length 1.50 metres
Maximum length + Girth 3.0 metres
Nagpur
Nagpur G.P.O 64.Poland 20 kg. Maximum length 1.50 metres
Maximum length + Girth 3.0 metres
Patna
Patna G.P.O 20 kg.
65.Tanzania Maximum length 1.50 metres
Maximum length + Girth 3.0 metres
Chandigarh
Vide GSR 723 (E) dated 26/12/1997
Chandigarh H.O.
20 kg.
66. Georgia Maximum length 1.5 metres
Sri nagar
Maximum length + Girth 3.0 metres
1. Sri nagar H.O.

--- Page 142 ---
67.Cuba 20 kg. Maximum length 1.5 metres
2. Sri nagar Sub Maximum length + Girth 3.0 metres
Foreign Post
Agartala 68.Brunei 20 kg. Maximum length 1.5 metres
Daruslam Maximum length + Girth 2.0 metres
1. Agartala H.O.
Silchar 69.Taiwan 20 kg. Maximum length 1.5 metres
Maximum length + Girth 3.0 metres
Silchar H.O.
Magalore 20 kg.
70.Belarus Maximum length 1.5 metres
Maximum length + Girth 3.0 metres
Mangalore H.O
Maximum length 1.5 metres
Agra
20 kg.
71.Philippines Maximum length + Girth 3.0 metres
Agra H.O.
Shilong
20 kg.
72. Fiji Maximum length 1.5 metres
Maximum length + Girth 3.0 metres
Shilong H.O.
Trichy
20 kg.
73.Nauru Maximum length 1.5 metres
Maximum length + Girth 3.0 metres
Tiruchirapalli H.O.
Vide GSR 406 (E) dated 22/07/1998
Madurai
Madurai H.O
Bhubaneshwar
Bhubaneshwar H.O.
Cuttack
Cuttack H.O.
Salem
Salem H.O.
Vijayawada

--- Page 143 ---
Vijayawada H.O.
Tirupati
Tirupati H.O.
Gwalior
Gwalior H.O.
Raipur
Raipur H.O.
Bhopal
Bhopal H.O.
Jammu
Jammu Tawi H.O.
Shimla
Shimla H.O.
Meerut
Meerut H.O.
Kanchipuram
Kanchipuram H.O.
Varanasi
Varanasi H.O.
Vide S.O No. 886 (E)
dated 26/09/1988
Allahbad
Allahbad HO

--- Page 144 ---
Tirupur
Tirupur HO
Pondicherry
Pondicherry HO
Ranchi
Ranchi HO
Surat
Surat HO
Goa
Panaji HO
Alwaye
Alwaye HO
Vide S.O No. 68 (E)
Dated 10/01/1989
Moradabad
Moradabad H.O.
Gorakhpur
Gorakhpur H.O.
Quilon
Quilon H.O.
Jamshedpur
Jamshedpur H.O.
Vide 478 (E) dated
24/06/1989
Dhanbad

--- Page 145 ---
Dhanbad H.O.
Vide S.O. No. 804 (E)
12/10/1989
Mysore
Mysore H.O
Imphal
Imphal H.O.
Vide S.O. No. 821(E)
dated 16/10/1989
Calicut
Calicut H.O.
Vide S.O. No. 1078
dated 29/12/1989
Trichur
Trichur H.O
Vide S.O No. 520
dated 29/6/1990
Trivandrum
Trivandrum H.O.
Lucknow
Lucknow G.P.O.
(c) Any charge, surcharge, cess, tax etc. notified by the Government of India, from time
to time, shall apply.

--- Tables ---
(i) For the value of periodical from
Re. 1/- to Rs. 20/-	Rs. 2/- for first 100 gms and part
thereof, and Rs. 3/- for every
additional 100 grams and part thereof
(ii) For the value of periodical from Rs.
21/- to Rs. 50/-	Rs.4/- for first 100gms and part
thereof , and Rs. 5/- for every
additional 100 gms and part thereof
(iii) For the value of periodical from Rs.
51/- and above	Rs. 8/-
for first 100 gms and part thereof,
and Rs. 9/- for every additional 100
gms and part thereof

Sl.No	Name of the service	Item	Name of the
country	Rate (In
Rupees)
1	LETTERS	Up to 20 grams
For every
additional 20
grams or part
thereof up to 500
grams
Beyond 500 grams,
for every
additional 100
grams or part
hereof up to 2000
grams	For all the
countries.	20.00
8.00
30.00
2.	Small Packets	UP to 100 grams
For every
additional 100
grams or part
thereof up to 2000
grams	For all the
countries	40.00
30.00
3.	Printed Papers	Up to 20 grams
For every
additional 20
grams or part
thereof up to 500
grams
Beyond 500 grams,
for every
additional 100
grams or part	For all the
countries	10.00
5.00
20.00

		hereof up to 2000
grams		
4.	Blind literature
packets		For all the
countries	Exempted
from
postage
5.	Post card (Single)		Pakistan,
Bangladesh, Nepal
and Bhutan
(ii) Asian Pacific
Postal Union
countries except
Pakistan,
Bangladesh Nepal
and Bhutan.
(iii) Universal
Postal Union
countries other
than those referred
to in (i) and (ii)
above.	4.00
6.00
7.00

Sl. No	Name of service	Item	Name of the
country	Rate (In
Rupees)
1.	BULK BAG	Not exceeding
5 kg
Per kg
exceeding 5 kg	For all the
countries	350.00
100.00

